Why do people do the things they do? 

That’s what we are here to find out – Human Behavior and the 
Social Environment (HBSE) – How do they connect? How does it 
shape us? Why do we think and feel the way we do? 

This will be explored throughout this course by examining human 
behavior throughout life stage developments and our interactions 
with the social environment. This course will explore theoretical 
perspectives in Social Work to help provide a foundation for 
organizing thoughts about client needs and issues they are seeking 
supports for. Theories will then be connected to important 
developmental, social, and cultural issues that present throughout 
each stage of life to create an overall picture of a client’s experience 
and how we can use this information to have a better understanding 
of how people we work with are influenced and why. Knowledge of 
typical development in each stage of life will also inform the Social 
Worker if any other supports, resources, or services may be needed. 

 


“Social workers are knowledgeable about human 
behavior across the life course; the range of social 
systems in which people live; and the ways social 
systems promote or deter people in maintaining or 
achieving health and well-being. Social workers apply 
theories and knowledge from the liberal arts to 
understand biology, social, cultural, psychological and 
spiritual development.” – 
CSWE (2008, p.6) 

 


There is no single definition for HBSE. I encourage you to think 


about what it means to you. In Social Work, rarely do we work with 
people whose problems are straightforward. Typically we encounter 
problems that are complex and interconnected on several levels 
and require looking at the relationships between behaviors and 
environments. We like to explore as much as possible in Social 
Work and use of theories within various dimensions (biological, 
psychological, social, and spiritual) allows us to have a broader 
knowledge base in several different areas to have a better 
understanding and ability to “put it all together” to assess and 
intervene with client concerns. 

We will utilize vignettes to work in connecting each theory, 
approach, perspective, and life stage of development throughout 
this course. Each section will begin with a vignette that will be 
incorporated throughout to demonstrate examples of each concept 
(that is not covered in your readings). Life stage development 
vignettes will be used as an “unfolding case” to allow you to work in 
critical thinking of how the theories, approaches, and perspectives 
connect throughout each life stage. 

Social Work Values: 

Service – engage in this by helping people address 
and hopefully resolve their problems/concerns – also 
engage in service through volunteering time to 
organizations within the community (boards, mentoring 
programs, etc). 

Social Justice – advocate and fight against social 
injustices for individuals/groups – generally focusing in 
areas of poverty, discrimination, education, 
unemployment, etc. 


Integrity – We must always work to be trustworthy, 
honest, and responsible in our work and with our 
clients. 

Competence – always strive to improve our 
knowledge and expertise through continuous learning 
and education. 

Human relationships – connect as partners 
throughout the process – also work to improve 
relationships within the client’s system to help improve 
overall functioning through increased connections/
supports. 

Dignity – value and respect each person we meet and 
engage with compassion and respect. 

Critical Thinking Skills: 

What is it? 

Reasoning – interest in the unknown – what’s 
going? 


Evaluating – challenging appearances – what do 
you think you see vs what you actually see? 


Problem-solving/decision making – explore all 
sides and determine the best decision. 





Analyzing – how do they connect? What does it 
all mean? How does it all add up? Best decision? 
Time for reflection. 




 


Why is this important? 

1. Theories, approaches, and perspectives help lay the foundation 
for any realistic and rational practice in any field. Our 
professional values lay the foundation on which social work’s 
mission is based. They help guide us in decision making as they 
are directed towards a specific purpose and help us to grow 
and develop. 
2. Justification for your decisions – we must use critical thinking 
skills to explore and process how decisions may impact our 
clients and we must be able to discuss how our decisions were 
determined. 


About the Author: 

Susan Tyler, MSW, LCSW – Clinical Assistant Professor, University 
of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 

Professor Tyler has been teaching at the School of Social Work 
since Spring 2018. Before joining the School of Social Work, she 
worked in a community based mental health agency for over 10 
years with a focus in Infant and Early Childhood Mental Health 
and School-Based Mental Health services revolving around issues 


related to trauma, abuse, attachment, anxiety, depression, domestic 
violence, foster care, adjustments, disruptive behaviors, and ADHD, 
through use of play therapy techniques and dyadic interventions. 

“Be the change you wish to see in the world” – Mahatma Gandhi 

“You can do it” – Rob Schneider 

References: 

CSWE Commission on Accreditation. (2008). EPAS Handbook. 
Council on Social Work Education. 


Attributions 

The Meaning Behind This Book 

I began my career in Social Work working in the mental health field 
with a focus in Infant and Early Childhood Mental Health. I realized 
during this time just how much a person’s experiences and their 
environments impacted all aspects of their lives, including why they 
made the choices or responded the way they did. After a little over 
a decade of mental health work, I had an opportunity to make a 
change in my career and joined the world of academia. During my 
first semester teaching, I became aware of the Open Educational 
Resources at our university and immediately thought of the benefits 
of transitioning this course with providing a free, online accessible 
textbook that would support both students and instructors alike 
in exploring human behavior, social environment, and life stage 
development. 
I began working with the University library system to 
compile different chapters from different open and free textbooks 
from other disciplines and then added original content to support 
connection to Social Work foundations and practice in the first 
four sections, as well as creating vignettes to use throughout each 
section. This text will support the reader with a deeper 
understanding of Social Work theories, perspectives, and 
approaches, life stage development, and connection of how they are 
utilized in organizing, assessing, and planning for client support. 
It is my hope you will come away from this course seeing others 
through a lens of empathy, compassion, and curiosity, stopping to 
ask yourself, “what must they have experienced in their life?” to 
gain a better understanding before jumping to conclusions or 
assumptions of others. 

“We are all unique. Don’t judge, understand instead.” ~ 
Roy T. 
Bennett 


Human Behavior and the Social Environment I is adapted from 
various work produced and distributed under the Creative 
Commons License. Below, is the list of all adapted chapters used in 
the making of this book. 

Cover Image: Image by Gerd Altmann from Pixabay. 

Chapter 1: Adapted from Chapter 2.2 from Principles of Social 
Psychology by the University of Minnesota under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 
International License, except where otherwise noted. 

Chapter 2: Adapted from Chapter 9.2: 
Lifespan Theories 
in 
OpenStax, 
Psychology. OpenStax CNX. 
Oct 2, 2019 
http://cnx.org/contents/
4abf04bf-93a0-45c3-9cbc-2cefd46e68cc@12.2. 
Download for free 
at 
http://cnx.org/contents/
4abf04bf-93a0-45c3-9cbc-2cefd46e68cc@12.2. 

Chapter 3: Adapted from Theoretical Perspectives by Rice 
University under the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 license. 

Chapter 4: Adapted from Chapter 3.2 from Sociology by the 
University of Minnesota under the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where 
otherwise noted. 

Chapter 5: Adapted from Chapter 12.1 from Principles of Social 
Psychology by the University of Minnesota under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 
International License, except where otherwise noted. 

Chapter 6: Adapted from Chapter 12.2 from Principles of Social 
Psychology by the University of Minnesota under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 
International License, except where otherwise noted. 

Chapter 7: Adapted from Chapter 12.3 from Principles of Social 
Psychology by the University of Minnesota under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 
International License, except where otherwise noted. 

Chapter 8: Adapted from Chapter 3.1, 3.2, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, and 3.8 


from Social Problems by the University of Minnesota under the 
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 
International License, except where otherwise noted. 

Chapter 9: Adapted from Chapter 2 from Lifespan Development: 
A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 

Chapter 10 – 12: Adapted from Chapter 3 from Lifespan 
Development: A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by 
Martha Lally and Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported 
license. 

Chapter 13 – 15: Adapted from Chapter 4 from Lifespan 
Development: A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by 
Martha Lally and Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported 
license. 

Chapter 16 – 18: Adapted from Chapter 5 from Lifespan 
Development: A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by 
Martha Lally and Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported 
license. 

Chapter 19 – 21: Adapted from Chapter 6 from Lifespan 
Development: A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by 
Martha Lally and Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported 
license. 

Chapter 22 – 24: Adapted from Chapter 7 from Lifespan 
Development: A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by 
Martha Lally and Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported 
license. 

Chapter 25 – 27: Adapted from Chapter 8 from Lifespan 
Development: A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by 
Martha Lally and Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative 


Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported 
license. 

Chapter 28 – 30: Adapted from Chapter 9 from Lifespan 
Development: A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by 
Martha Lally and Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported 
license. 


PART 
I 
THE PERSON IN 
ENVIRONMENT 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore the Person in Environment Approach 
Describe the Micro, Mezzo, and Macro 
Approach 
Describe the Bio-Psycho-Social-Spiritual 
Approach 
Describe Systems Theory 
Describe Ecological Theory 
Describe Ecosystems Theory 
Introduce Strengths Perspective 



Vignette 

Jason covering face with hands
Photo by Christian Erfurt 
on 
Unsplash 

Jason’s parents have been 
called by the school social 
worker to discuss concerns 
related to fighting with a peer 
and declining grades. 
His 
parents also report concerns at 
home with poor sibling 
relationships, anger issues, and 
“a bad attitude, always talking 
back, never listening or doing 
what we ask him to do”. They report a long family history of substance 
abuse and mental health issues (anxiety and depression). They report 
increased concerns related to this as they recently found marijuana in 
Jason’s room. Jason (14 y/o) reports “My parents don’t know what 
they’re talking about. My little brother and sister just get me in trouble 
because I don’t let them touch my stuff, besides, my parents don’t care, 
they don’t listen to me, they just want me to do what they say. And I 
don’t see what the big deal is with me smoking a little weed, it helps 
me feel better and not be so mad all the time.” 

What comes to mind 
when you hear 
Person-In-Environment? 

This approach is the concept that people can be heavily influenced 
by their environment. It highlights the importance of understanding 
an individual and their behavior through their environment. A 
person’s environment, along with their experiences, will help shape 
the way they view the world, how they think, and why they respond 
the way they do. In Social Work, gathering information from our 
clients is a foundation piece of the work we do and knowing what 


information to seek and how to organize it is like gathering pieces 
of a puzzle and working to put them together to get the whole 
picture (or at least as much of it as we can). This lesson will begin to 
introduce some particular approaches, perspectives, and theories 
that help build the lens and foundation of the Social Work 
profession. 

Micro, Mezzo, and Macro 

We will first start with 
the Micro, Mezzo, and Macro Approach. This 
is simply looking at levels 
within a person’s system, which will help 
give you some direction in what supports may be needed. 

The Micro-level represents individual needs and involves direct 
interactions with clients, which is the most common type of social 
work. This level explores aspects related to biology, psychological 
needs, social (peer) and interpersonal (family) relationships or 
supports, and spiritual beliefs. 

Jason’s micro level – Biologically no physical health 
issues have been reported but some concerns may be 
related to how use of marijuana may affect his physical 
health. He is an adolescent which means his body 
continues to experience hormonal and physical changes. 
Family reports history of substance abuse issues as well as 
struggles with mental health issues, which may indicate 
possible genetic connections to be explored. This may also 
be connected to psychological needs as he may be 
experiencing anxiety or depressive symptoms or if he 
reports use of marijuana as a coping mechanism. He is 


also reported to present with anger, fighting with his 
siblings and struggling with strained family relationships. 
This connects us to social aspects, exploring how he 
identifies his relationships and supports. No spiritual 
beliefs were reported in the vignette but would need to be 
explored when meeting with Jason. 

The Mezzo-level represents connections or interactions with small 
groups, such as family, schools, churches, neighborhoods, 
community organizations, and peers/co-workers. 

Jason’s mezzo level – Here we would look further into 
how his relationships and interactions with various 
groups impact him – family, peers, school staff/faculty, 
possible spiritual affiliation/church, and any community 
groups or organizations he identifies being connected 
with. 

The Macro-level represents connections to systemic issues within 
large systems, such as laws/legislation, policy, healthcare systems, 
and international associations. This level also explores ethical 
frameworks, historical impacts of group experiences, and how 
discrimination and prejudice can impact marginalized populations. 

Jason’s macro level – Education/school policies, mental 
health policies, healthcare systems, culture and historical 


impacts of group experiences, drug laws and policies, and 
possible discrimination and prejudice impacts need to be 
explored. 

It is important to remember to explore the interconnectedness and 
interactions between what information is presenting on each level 
for the person and how this may have an impact on their functioning 
and development within their environment. 

Bio-Psycho-Social-Spiritual 

The Bio-Psycho-Social-Spiritual Approach assesses levels of 
functioning within biological, psychological, social, and spiritual 
dimensions (and how they are connected) to help understand 
human behavior. This approach includes much of the same 
information you will find in the Micro level but we are wanting 
to take a deeper look at how the individual is functioning in each 
dimension as well as how they can impact one another. 

The Biological component includes aspects related to overall 
health, physical abilities, weight, diet, lifestyle, medication/
substance use, gender, and genetic connections/vulnerabilities. 

Jason’s biological aspects 
– No concerns with overall 
physical health, developmental aspects of adolescence 
need to be considered, substance use concerns and 
impacts, identifies as male, and possible genetic 


connections/vulnerabilities (substance abuse, anxiety, 
depression, or any other family history of concern). 

 


The Psychological component includes aspects related to mental 
health, self-esteem, attitudes/beliefs, temperament, coping skills, 
emotions, learning, memory, perceptions, and personality. 

Jason’s psychological aspects 
– Anger, substance use 
concerns and impacts, possible esteem issues, poor coping 
skills and emotional regulation, cognitive development 
and any related concerns, personality and temperament 
characteristics, and explorations of how he perceives his 
world. 

The Social component includes aspects related to peer and family 
relationships, social supports, cultural traditions, education, 
employment/job security, socioeconomic status, and societal 
messages. 

Jason’s social aspects 
– Strained family relationships, 
school relationships/educational supports, exploration of 
socioeconomic impacts, exploration of cultural traditions, 


and identification/exploration of peer relationships and 
supports. 

The Spiritual component includes aspects related to spiritual or 
religious beliefs, or belief in a “higher being” or higher power they 
feel connected to or supported by. 

Jason’s spiritual aspects 
– No spiritual aspects were 
reported but we would want to explore what this means 
to Jason. Does he identify with a church, religion, or 
higher power/being? What does it mean to him? Does it 
bring any support and comfort or is it causing increased 
stress as he is working to “figure out what it all means”? 

Looking at each dimension of the Bio-Psycho-Social-Spiritual 
Approach allows you to engage in a more holistic exploration and 
assessment of a person as it examines and connects four important 
domains of their life. 

Systems Theory 

Systems Theory states behavior is influenced by a result of factors 
that work together as a system and are interconnected – each part 
plays an important role in the function of the whole, and the whole 
in turn supports and sustains the parts. A person’s family, friends, 
school, work, economic class, home environment, and other factors 
all influence how a person thinks and acts. A social worker must 


observe and assess all of the systems a person experiences, as they 
contribute to their behavior and well-being, and work to strengthen 
those systems as they are connected and influence one another. 
This is used to develop 
a holistic view of 
individuals within their 
environment, which is then used to lead to 
the most appropriate 
practice intervention. 

Within Systems Theory we will also explore roles (routine tasks 
and behaviors of people within a system). We all have roles and 
engage in them whether we recognize it or not. Some examples of 
roles are leader, caretaker, parent, child, sibling, enabler, scapegoat, 
citizen, spouse, and worker. Many people feel their roles identify 
them. This may reinforce behaviors when positive feelings or 
experiences are associated with the role(s) or maybe a motivator for 
change when the role(s) are connected to more negative feelings or 
experiences. Knowing what roles a person is engaged in, and how 
they perceive each role, will support your work in understanding 
their experiences and what needs are presenting. 

Ecological Theory 

Ecological Theory focuses on the interaction between the 
individual and their environment. It discusses the active 
involvement of people with their environments and development as 
well as both (environment/development) continuously changing. 

“Thoughts become perception, Perception becomes reality. Alter 
your thoughts, Alter your reality.” ~ William James 

An important reminder of this theory is to remember the 
importance of perception – how people perceive or interpret their 
environment and experiences influences their overall functioning 
or well-being. This is also regardless of how problems or concerns 
may appear to the social worker. You will need to explore how the 
client views their situation before assuming certain situations are 
problematic. We need to try and see it through their eyes and get 


an understanding of how they were feeling. It is their story and 
their reality. In social work practice, this can best be understood by 
looking at individuals, families, policies, communities, and cultures 
and identifying strengths and weaknesses in the transactional 
processes between the systems. 

Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological Systems Model used to 
explore Ecosystems Theory: 

https://www.slideshare.net/CLMontecarlo/
bronfenbrenner-ecological-theory-54149823 

Bronfenbrenner believed an individual’s development was affected 
by everything in their surrounding environment and divided the 
environment into five different levels: the microsystem, the 
mesosystem, the exosystem, the macrosystem, and the 
chronosystem. 

The microsystem is the system closest to the individual and the 
one in which they have direct interactions. Some examples include 
home, school, or work. A microsystem typically includes family, 
peers, or caregivers. Relationships in a microsystem are bi-
directional, meaning, how you respond and react to the people will 
affect their response and reaction to you. This is the most influential 
level within the theory. 

The mesosystem is where a person’s individual microsystems are 
interconnected and influence one another. These interactions have 
an indirect impact on the individual, which can be positive or 
negative depending on the elements of the system working together 
(positive) or working against each other (negative). 

The exosystem refers to a setting in which the person is not 
an active participant, but still affects them. This includes decisions 


that affect a person, but they have no decision-making abilities. An 
example of this would be a child affected by a parent losing a job. 

The macrosystem is the cultural environment in which the 
person lives and all other systems that affect them such as economy, 
cultural values, and political systems. 

The chronosystem encompasses transitions and shifts 
throughout a person’s life. It looks at the timing of the event in 
relation to a person’s development, such as how death affects 
children of different ages. Historical events that occur during a 
person’s life are also explored such as the impacts of the September 
11th attacks. 

Jason’s story – With use of Systems Theory, we will 
want to look at aspects of micro, mezzo, and macro levels 
as well as bio-psycho-social-spiritual dimensions above 
and how they interact and influence one another. Here we 
will also explore what roles Jason feels he engages in (son, 
brother, student, friend) as well as roles he may not 
recognize or identify (leader, caretaker (if he is asked to 
help with caring for younger siblings), or role model). We 
will also want to explore how Jason perceives each role 
(positive or negative) to gain a better understanding of his 
experience and work in supporting his needs. With use of 
Ecological Theory, we add the addition of looking at how 
development and environment continue to grow and 
change, and how this continues to impact our clients as 
they engage within their systems. 
Ecosystems Theory 
takes from both Systems Theory and Ecological Theory, 
combining major tenets from each and providing us the 
opportunity to look deeper into the complexity of each 
network a client experiences and gain a better 


understanding of how they interact and impact one 
another. 


Strengths Perspective 

A foundational perspective of Social Work is the Strengths 
Perspective. All people have strengths and abilities that allow them 
to grow and adapt. This perspective takes the focus off the problem 
and allows us to identify ways for clients to use their strengths 
in achieving their goals. Clients are seen as the experts of their 
experiences. We utilize their insights to explore times of resiliency 
and partner with them to identify supports and solutions and help 
support their ability to grow. It is also important to remember to 
evaluate the environment for possible barriers and impacts while 
assessing needs and strengths. 

 



Thumbnail for the embedded element "What is STRENGTH-BASED PRACTICE? What does STRENGTH-BASED PRACTICE mean?"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=3 

 


Jason’s Strengths – Family support, both biological 
parents in home and still together, awareness of family 
history, school supports, able bodied, no developmental 
delays reported (but should be explored if any concerns 
connected to this), has found a coping skills (even if it is 
not the most appropriate way, he is engaging in some self 
regulation work), and was able to engage with the school 
Social Worker during their meeting instead of remaining 
closed off and refusing to speak. 


What other strengths can you identify? 


How would you work to explore and identify strengths 
with Jason? 

Exploration of Strengths: The following link will 
discuss strengths based practice values and explore the 
5 types of questions Dennis Saleebey (University of 
Kansas, a pioneer in developing and promoting 
Strengths Based Practice) 
suggests to use to help assess 
strengths of our clients. The example questions have a 
focus on parental interactions but the examples and 
ideas can be expanded to working with any client 
population. 

http://www.preventconnect.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/Strength-based-questions.pdf 

 


 


Please continue on to Chapter 1: How We Use Our Expectations to 
explore more about our expectations, judgments, responses, and 
biases. 

 



Key Takeaways: 

Think about a person’s whole experience. What 
does that encompass? Childhood? Family? 
Friends? What else comes to mind? 
We need to look at their experiences at each 
level and within different systems, as well as how 
they interact, to get the whole picture (Person in 
Environment). 
The Strength’s Perspective is a foundational 
perspective in the field of Social Work. It states all 
people have strengths and often times these 
strengths can be found within their struggles. 


References: 

The Audiopedia. (2017, May 1). 
What is STRENGTH-BASED 
PRACTICE? What does STRENGTH-BASED PRACTICE mean? [Video 
file]. Youtube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCPC6BSSIX4 

 



Chapter 1: How We Use Our 
Expectations 

Chapter 1 Learning Objectives 

Provide examples of how salience and accessibility 
influence information processing. 
Review, differentiate and give examples of the 
cognitive heuristics that influence social judgment. 
Summarize and give examples of the importance of 
social cognition in everyday life. 


Once we have developed a set of schemas and attitudes, we 
naturally use that information to help us judge and respond to 
others. Our expectations help us think about, size up, and make 
sense of individuals, groups of people, and the relationships among 
people. If we have learned, for example, that someone is friendly 
and interested in us, we are likely to approach them; if we have 
learned that they are threatening or unlikable, we will be more likely 
to withdraw. And if we believe that a person has committed a crime, 
we may process new information in a manner that helps convince us 
that our judgment was correct. In this section, we will consider how 
we use our stored knowledge to come to accurate (and sometimes 
inaccurate) conclusions about our social worlds. Table 2.1 “How 
Expectations Influence Our Social Cognition” summarizes the 


concepts that we will discuss, some of the many ways that our 
existing schemas and attitudes influence how we respond to the 
information around us. 

Table 2.1 
How Expectations Influence Our Social Cognition 


Cognitive Process Description Example 
Cognitive 
accessibility 
Some schemas and 
attitudes are more 
accessible than others. 
We may think a lot 
about our new haircut 
because it is 
important for us. 
Salience 
Some stimuli, such as 
those that are unusual, 
colorful, or moving, grab 
our attention. 
We may base our 
judgments on a single 
unusual event and 
ignore hundreds of 
other events that are 
more usual. 
Representativeness 
heuristic 
We tend to make 
judgments according to 
how well the event 
matches our expectations. 
After a coin has come 
up heads many times 
in a row, we may 
erroneously think that 
the next flip is more 
likely to be tails. 
Availability 
heuristic 
Things that come to mind 
easily tend to be seen as 
more common. 
We may overestimate 
the crime statistics in 
our own area because 
these crimes are so 
easy to recall. 
Anchoring and 
adjustment 
Although we try to adjust 
our judgments away from 
them, our decisions are 
overly based on the things 
that are most highly 
accessible in memory. 
We may buy more of a 
product when it is 
advertised in bulk 
than when it is 
advertised as a single 
item. 
Counterfactual 
thinking 
We may “replay” events 
such that they turn out 
differently—especially 
when only minor changes 
in the events leading up to 
them make a difference. 
We may feel 
particularly bad about 
events that might not 
have occurred if only 
a small change might 
have prevented them. 
False consensus 
bias 
We tend to see other 
people as similar to us. 
We are surprised 
when other people 
have different 
political opinions or 
values. 
Overconfidence 
We tend to have more 
confidence in our skills, 
abilities, and judgments 
than is objectively 
warranted. 
Eyewitnesses are 
often extremely 
confident that their 
identifications are 
accurate, even when 
they are not. 


Automatic Versus Controlled Cognition 

A good part of both cognition and social cognition is spontaneous 
or automatic. Automatic cognition refers to 
thinking that occurs out 
of our awareness, quickly, and without taking much effort (Ferguson 
& Bargh, 2003; Ferguson, Hassin, & Bargh, 2008). The things that we 
do most frequently tend to become more automatic each time we 
do them until they reach a level where they don’t really require us to 
think about them very much. Most of us can ride a bike and operate 
a television remote control in an automatic way. Even though it took 
some work to do these things when we were first learning them, it 
just doesn’t take much effort anymore. And because we spend a lot 
of time making judgments about others, many of these judgments 
(and particularly those about people we don’t know very well and 
who don’t matter much to us) are made automatically (Willis & 
Todorov, 2006). 

Because automatic thinking occurs outside of our conscious 
awareness, we frequently have no idea that it is occurring and 
influencing our judgments or behaviors. You might remember a 
time when you came back from your classes, opened the door to 
your dorm room, and 30 seconds later couldn’t remember where 
you had put your keys! You know that you must have used the keys 
to get in, and you know you must have put them somewhere, but 
you simply don’t remember a thing about it. Because many of our 
everyday judgments and behaviors are performed “on automatic,” 
we may not always be aware that they are occurring or influencing 
us. 

It is, of course, a good thing that many things operate 
automatically because it would be a real pain to have to think about 
them all the time. If you couldn’t drive a car automatically, you 
wouldn’t be able to talk to the other people riding with you or 
listen to the radio at the same time—you’d have to be putting most 
of your attention into driving. On the other hand, relying on our 
snap judgments about Bianca—that she’s likely to be expressive, for 


instance—can be erroneous. Sometimes we need to—and should—go 
beyond automatic cognition and consider people more carefully. 
When we deliberately size up and think about something—for instance 
another person—we call it thoughtful cognition or controlled 
cognition. 

Although you might think that controlled cognition would be 
more common and that automatic thinking would be less likely, that 
is not always the case. The problem is that thinking takes effort and 
time, and we often don’t have too many of those things available. 
As a result, we frequently rely on automatic cognition, and these 
processes—acting outside of our awareness—have a big effect on 
our behaviors. In the following Research Focus, we will consider an 
example of a study that uses a common social cognitive procedure 
known as priming — a technique in which information is temporarily 
brought into memory through exposure to situational events—and 
that shows that priming can influence judgments entirely out of 
awareness. 

Research Focus 

Behavioral Effects of Priming 

In one demonstration of how automatic cognition can 
influence our behaviors without us being aware of them, 
John Bargh and his colleagues (Bargh, Chen, & Burrows, 
1996) conducted two studies, each with the exact same 
procedure. In the experiments, they showed college 
students sets of five scrambled words. The students were 
to unscramble the five words in each set to make a 
sentence. Furthermore, for half of the research 
participants, the words were related to the stereotype of 


the elderly. These participants saw words such as “in 
Florida retired live people” and “bingo man the forgetful 
plays.” 

The other half of the research participants also made 
sentences but did so out of words that had nothing to do 
with the elderly stereotype. The purpose of this task was to 
prime (activate) the schema of elderly people in memory for 
some of the participants but not for others. 

The experimenters then assessed whether the priming of 
elderly stereotypes would have any effect on the students’ 
behavior—and indeed it did. When each research 
participant had gathered all his or her belongings, thinking 
that the experiment was over, the experimenter thanked 
him or her for participating and gave directions to the 
closest elevator. Then, without the participant knowing it, 
the experimenters recorded the amount of time that the 
participant spent walking from the doorway of the 
experimental room toward the elevator. As you can see in 
the following figure, the same results were found in both 
experiments—the participants who had made sentences 
using words related to the elderly stereotype took on the 
behaviors of the elderly—they walked significantly more 
slowly (in fact, about 12% more slowly across the two 
studies) as they left the experimental room. 

In two separate experiments, Bargh, Chen, and Borroughs (1996) found that students who had been exposed to words related to the elderly stereotype walked more slowly than those who had been exposed to more neutral words.
Figure 
2.3 
Automatic Priming 
and 
Behavior 



In two separate experiments, Bargh, Chen, and 
Borroughs (1996) found that students who had been 
exposed to words related to the elderly stereotype walked 
more slowly than those who had been exposed to more 
neutral words. 

To determine if these priming effects occurred out of the 
conscious awareness of the participants, Bargh and his 
colleagues asked the third group of students to complete 
the priming task and then to indicate whether they thought 
the words they had used to make the sentences had any 
relationship to each other or could possibly have influenced 
their behavior in any way. These students had no awareness 
of the possibility that the words might have been related to 
the elderly or could have influenced their behavior. 

The point of these experiments, and many others like 
them, is clear—it is quite possible that our judgments and 
behaviors are influenced by our social situations, and this 
influence may be entirely outside of our conscious 
awareness. To return again to Bianca, it is even possible 
that we notice her nationality and that our beliefs about 
Italians influence our responses to her, even though we 
have no idea that they are doing so and really believe that 
they have not. It is in this way that our stereotypes may 
have their insidious effects, and it is exactly these 
processes that may have led to a mistaken eyewitness 
account in the case of Rickie Johnson. 


Salience and Accessibility Determine Which 
Expectations We Use 

We each have a large number of schemas that we might bring to 
bear on any type of judgment we might make. When thinking about 
Bianca, for instance, we might focus on her nationality, her gender, 
her physical attractiveness, her intelligence, or any of many other 
possible features. And we will react to Bianca differently depending 
on which schemas we use. Schema activation is determined both 
by characteristics of the person we are judging—the 
salience 
of the 
characteristics—and by the current activation of the schema in the 
individual—the 
cognitive accessibility of the schema. 

Salience 

One determinant of which schemas are likely to be used in social 
justice is the extent to which we attend to particular features of the 
person or situation that we are responding to. We are more likely to 
judge people on the basis of characteristics that are salient, meaning 
that they attract our attention when we see something or someone 
with them. Things that are unusual, negative, colorful, bright and 
moving are more salient and thus more likely to be attended to than 
are things that do not have these characteristics (McArthur & Post, 
1977; Taylor & Fiske, 1978). 

 



Collage: a man pretending two feathers are a moustache, a man jumping on a sand dune, a woman in a tank top with many tattoos
Which of these people are more salient and therefore more likely to attract 
your attention? Erich Ferdinand – The Purger – CC BY 2.0; Hamad 
AL-Mohannna – Jump – CC BY-ND 2.0; LethaColleen – Session 5: Finished! – 
CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. 

 


We are more likely to initially judge people on the basis of their 
sex, race, age, and physical attractiveness, rather than on, say, their 
religious orientation or their political beliefs, in part because these 
features are so salient when we see them (Brewer, 1988). Another 
thing that makes something particularly salient is its infrequency or 
unusualness. Because Bianca is from Italy and very few other people 
in our school are, that characteristic is something that we notice—it 
is salient, and we are therefore likely to attend to it. That she is also 
a woman is—at least in this context—less salient. 

The salience of the stimuli in our social worlds may sometimes 
lead us to make judgments on the basis of information that is 
actually less informative than is other less salient information. 
Imagine, for instance, that you wanted to buy a new music player 
for yourself. You’ve been trying to decide whether to get the iPod or 
the Zune. You went online and checked out 
Consumer Reports, and 
you found that although the players differed on many dimensions, 
including price, battery life, ability to share music, and so forth, the 
Zune was nevertheless rated significantly higher by the owners than 
was the iPod. As a result, you decide to go purchase one the next 
day. That night, however, you go to a party, and a friend of yours 
shows you her iPod. You check it out, and it seems really great. You 


tell her that you were thinking of buying a Zune, and she tells you 
that you are crazy. She says she knows someone who had one and 
had a lot of problems—it didn’t download music right, the battery 
went out right after it went out of warranty, and so forth—and that 
she would never buy one. Would you still buy the Zune, or would 
you switch your plans? 

If you think about this question logically, the information that you 
just got from your friend isn’t really all that important—you now 
know the opinions of one more person, but that can’t really change 
the overall consumer ratings of the two machines very much. On the 
other hand, the information your friend gives you and the chance 
to use her iPod is highly salient. The information is right there in 
front of you, in your hand, whereas the statistical information from 
Consumer Reports 
is only in the form of a table that you saw on 
your computer. The outcome in cases such as this is that people 
frequently ignore the less salient, but more important, information, 
such as 
the likelihood that events occur across a large 
population—these statistics are known as base rates — in favor of the 
actually less important, but nevertheless more salient, information. 

Another case in which we ignore base-rate information occurs 
when we use the representativeness heuristic (remember that 
heuristic 
refers to a simplifying strategy that we use to make 
judgments). The representativeness heuristic occurs when we 
base 
our judgments on information that seems to represent, or match, 
what we expect will happen while ignoring more informative base-
rate information. Consider, for instance, the following puzzle. Let’s 
say that you went to a hospital, and you checked the records of 
the babies that were born today (Table 2.2 “Using the 
Representativeness Heuristic”). Which pattern of births do you think 
that you are most likely to find? 

Table 2.2 
Using the Representativeness Heuristic 


List A List B 
6:31 a.m. Girl 6:31 a.m. Boy 
8:15 a.m. Girl 8:15 a.m. Girl 
9:42 a.m. Girl 9:42 a.m. Boy 
1:13 p.m. Girl 1:13 p.m. Girl 
3:39 p.m. Boy 3:39 p.m. Girl 
5:12 p.m. Boy 5:12 p.m. Boy 
7:42 p.m. Boy 7:42 p.m. Girl 
11:44 p.m. Boy 11:44 p.m. Boy 

Most people think that list B is more likely, probably because list 
B looks more random and thus matches (is “representative of”) our 
ideas about randomness. But statisticians know that any pattern 
of four girls and four boys is equally likely and thus that List B is 
no more likely than List A. The problem is that we have an image 
of what randomness should be, which doesn’t always match what 
is rationally the case. Similarly, people who see a coin that comes 
up heads five times in a row will frequently predict (and perhaps 
even bet!) that tails will be next—it just seems like it has to be. But 
mathematically, this erroneous expectation (known as the gambler’s 
fallacy) is simply not true: The base-rate likelihood of any single coin 
flip being tails is only 50%, regardless of how many times it has 
come up heads in the past. 

To take one more example, consider the following information: 

I have a friend who is short, shy and writes poetry. Which of 
the following is she? (Choose one.) 

1. A professor of psychology 
2. A professor of Chinese 


Can you see how you might be led, potentially incorrectly, into 
thinking that my friend is a professor of Chinese? Why? Because 
the description (“short, shy, and writes poetry”) just seems so 
representative or stereotypical of our expectations about Chinese 


people. But the base rates tell us something completely different, 
which might make us wary. For one, because I am a psychology 
professor, it’s much more likely that I know more psychology 
professors than Chinese professors. And at least on my campus, 
the number of professors in the psychology department is much 
bigger than the number of professors of Chinese. Although base 
rates suggest that “psychology” would be the right answer, the use 
of the representative heuristic might lead us (probably incorrectly) 
to guess “Chinese” instead. 

Cognitive Accessibility 

Although which characteristics we use to think about objects or 
people is determined in part by the salience of their characteristics 
(our perceptions are influenced by our social situation), individual 
differences in the person who is doing the judging are also 
important (our perceptions are influenced by person variables). 
People vary in the schemas that they find important to use when 
judging others and when thinking about themselves. One way to 
consider this importance is in terms of the 
cognitive accessibility 
of the schema. Cognitive accessibility 
refers to 
the extent to which 
a schema is activated in memory and thus likely to be used in 
information processing. 

You probably know people who are golf nuts (or maybe tennis or 
some other sports nuts). All they can talk about is golf. For them, 
we would say that golf is a highly accessible construct. Because 
they love golf, it is important to their self-concept; they set many 
of their goals in terms of the sport, and they tend to think about 
things and people in terms of it (“if he plays golf, he must be a good 
person!”). Other people have highly accessible schemas about eating 
healthy food, exercising, environmental issues, or really good coffee, 
for instance. In short, when a schema is accessible, we are likely to 
use it to make judgments of ourselves and others. 


Although accessibility can be considered a person variable (a 
given idea is more highly accessible for some people than for 
others), accessibility can also be influenced by situational factors. 
When we have recently or frequently thought about a given topic, 
that topic becomes more accessible and is likely to influence our 
judgments. This is, in fact, the explanation for the results of the 
priming study you read about earlier—people walked slower because 
the concept of the elderly had been primed and thus was currently 
highly accessible for them. 

Because we rely so heavily on our schemas and attitudes—and 
particularly on those that are salient and accessible—we can 
sometimes be overly influenced by them. Imagine, for instance, that 
I asked you to close your eyes and determine whether there are 
more words in the English language that begin with the letter 
R 
or 
that have the letter 
R 
as the third letter. You would probably try 
to solve this problem by thinking of words that have each of the 
characteristics. It turns out that most people think there are more 
words that begin with 
R, even though there are in fact more words 
that have 
R 
as the third letter. 

You can see that this error can occur as a result of cognitive 
accessibility. To answer the question, we naturally try to think of 
all the words that we know that begin with 
R 
and that have 
R in 
the third position. The problem is that when we do that, it is much 
easier to retrieve the former than the latter because we store words 
by their first, not by their third, letter. We may also think that our 
friends are nice people because we see them primarily when they 
are around us (their friends). And the traffic might seem worse in 
our own neighborhood than we think it is in other places, in part 
because nearby traffic jams are more accessible for us than are 
traffic jams that occur somewhere else. And do you think it is more 
likely that you will be killed in a plane crash or in a car crash? 
Many people fear the former, even though the latter is much more 
likely: Your chances of being involved in an aircraft accident are 
about 1 in 11 million, whereas your chances of being killed in an 
automobile accident are 1 in 5,000—over 50,000 people are killed 


on U.S. highways every year. In this case, the problem is that plane 
crashes, which are highly salient, are more easily retrieved from our 
memory than are car crashes, which are less extreme. 

The tendency to make judgments of the frequency of an event or the 
likelihood that an event will occur, on the basis of the ease with which 
the event can be retrieved from memory is known as the availability 
heuristic (Schwarz & Vaughn, 2002; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). 
The idea is that things that are highly accessible (in this case, the 
term availability is used) come to mind easily and thus may overly 
influence our judgments. Thus, despite the clear facts, it may be 
easier to think of plane crashes than car crashes because the former 
are so highly salient. If so, the availability heuristic can lead to errors 
in judgments. 

Still another way that the cognitive accessibility of constructs 
can influence information processing is through their effects 
on 
processing fluency. Processing fluency refers to 
the ease with 
which we can process information in our environments. When 
stimuli are highly accessible, they can be quickly attended to and 
processed, and they, therefore, have a large influence on our 
perceptions. This influence is due, in part, to the fact that our 
body reacts positively to information that we can process quickly, 
and we use this positive response as a basis of judgment (Reber, 
Winkielman, & Schwarz, 1998; Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001). 

In one study demonstrating this effect, Norbert Schwarz and his 
colleagues (Schwarz et al., 1991) asked one set of college students 
to list 6 occasions when they had acted 
either 
assertively 
or 
unassertively 
and asked another set of college 
students to list 12 such examples. Schwarz determined that for most 
students, it was pretty easy to list 6 examples but pretty hard to list 
12. 

The researchers then asked the participants to indicate how 
assertive or unassertive they actually were. You can see from Figure 
2.4 “Processing Fluency” that the ease of processing influenced 
judgments. The participants who had an easy time listing examples 
of their behavior (because they only had to list 6 instances) judged 


that they did in fact have the characteristics they were asked about 
(either assertive or unassertive), in comparison with the participants 
who had a harder time doing the task (because they had to list 
12 instances). Other research has found similar effects—people rate 
that they ride their bicycles more often after they have been asked 
to recall only a few rather than many instances of doing so (Aarts & 
Dijksterhuis, 1999), and they hold an attitude with more confidence 
after being asked to generate few rather than many arguments that 
support it (Haddock, Rothman, Reber, & Schwarz, 1999). 

When it was relatively easy to complete the questionnaire (only 6 examples were required), the student participants rated that they had more of the trait than when the task was more difficult (12 answers were required). Data are from Schwarz et al. (1991).
Figure 
2.4 
Processing Fluency 

When it was relatively easy to complete the questionnaire (only 
6 examples were required), the student participants rated that they 
had more of the trait than when the task was more difficult (12 
answers were required). Data are from Schwarz et al. (1991). 

We are likely to use this type of quick and “intuitive” processing, 
based on our feelings about how easy it is to complete a task when 
we don’t have much time or energy for more in-depth processing, 
such as when we are under time pressure, tired, or unwilling to 
process the stimulus in sufficient detail. Of course, it is very 
adaptive to respond to stimuli quickly (Sloman, 2002; Stanovich & 
West, 2002; Winkielman, Schwarz, & Nowak, 2002), and it is not 
impossible that in at least some cases, we are better off making 
decisions based on our initial responses than on a more thoughtful 
cognitive analysis (Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch, 2001). For 
instance, Dijksterhuis, Bos, Nordgren, and van Baaren (2006) found 
that when participants were given tasks requiring decisions that 



were very difficult to make on the basis of cognitive analysis of the 
problem, they made better decisions when they didn’t try to analyze 
the details carefully but simply relied on their unconscious intuition. 

In sum, people are influenced not only by the information they get 
but by how they get it. We are more highly influenced by things that 
are salient and accessible and thus easily attended to, remembered, 
and processed. On the other hand, information that is harder to 
access from memory is less likely to be attended to, or takes more 
effort to consider is less likely to be used in our judgments, even 
if this information is statistically equally informative or even more 
informative. 

The False Consensus Bias Makes Us Think That 
We Are More Like Others Than We Really Are 

The tendency to base our judgments on the accessibility of social 
constructs can lead to still other errors in judgment. One such error 
is known as the false consensus bias: the tendency to overestimate 
the extent to which other people are similar to us. For instance, if 
you are in favor of abortion rights, opposed to gun control, and 
prefer rock music to jazz, then you are likely to think that other 
people share these beliefs (Ross, Greene, & House, 1977). In one 
demonstration of the false consensus bias, Joachim Krueger and 
his colleagues (Krueger & Clement, 1994) gave their research 
participants, who were college students, a personality test. Then 
they asked the same participants to estimate the percentage of 
other students in their school who would have answered the 
questions the same way that they did. The students who agreed 
with the items thought that others would agree with them too, 
whereas the students who disagreed thought that others would 
also disagree. You can see that the false consensus bias also occurs 
through the operation of cognitive accessibility: Once we have 


indicated our own belief, it becomes highly accessible, and it colors 
our estimates about other people. 

Although it is commonly observed, the false consensus bias does 
not occur in all dimensions. Specifically, the false consensus bias is 
not usually observed on judgments of positive personal traits that 
we highly value as important. People (falsely, of course) report that 
they have better personalities (e.g., a better sense of humor), that 
they engage in better behaviors (e.g., they are more likely to wear 
seat belts), and that they have brighter futures than almost everyone 
else (Chambers, 2008). These results suggest that although in most 
cases we assume that we are similar to others, in cases of valued 
personal characteristics the goals of self-concern lead us to see 
ourselves more positively than we see the average person. 

Perceptions of What “Might Have Been” Lead to 
Counterfactual Thinking 

In addition to influencing our judgments about ourselves and 
others, the salience and accessibility of information can have an 
important effect on our own emotions—for instance, our self-
esteem. Our emotional reactions to events are often colored not 
only by what did happen but also by what 
might have happened. If 
we can easily imagine an outcome that is better than what actually 
happened, then we may experience sadness and disappointment; on 
the other hand, if we can easily imagine that a result might have 
been worse than what actually happened, we may be more likely to 
experience happiness and satisfaction. 
The tendency to think about 
events according to what might have been known as counterfactual 
thinking (Roese, 1997). 

Imagine, for instance, that you were participating in an important 
contest, and you won the silver medal. How would you feel? 
Certainly, you would be happy that you won, but wouldn’t you 
probably also be thinking a lot about what might have happened if 


you had been just a little bit better—you might have won the gold 
medal! On the other hand, how might you feel if you won the bronze 
medal (third place)? If you were thinking about the counterfactual 
(the “what might have been”), perhaps the idea of not getting any 
medal at all would have been highly accessible—you’d be happy that 
you got the medal you did get. 

Medvec, Madey, and Gilovich (1995) investigated exactly this idea 
by videotaping the responses of athletes who won medals in the 
1992 summer Olympic Games. They videotaped the athletes both as 
they learned that they had won a silver or a bronze medal and again 
as they were awarded the medal. Then they showed these videos, 
without any sound, to people who did not know which medal which 
athlete had won. The raters indicated how they thought the athlete 
was feeling, on a range from “agony” to “ecstasy.” The results showed 
that the bronze medalists did indeed seem to be, on average, 
happier than were the silver medalists. Then in a follow-up study, 
raters watched interviews with many of these same athletes as they 
talked about their performance. The raters indicated what we would 
expect on the basis of counterfactual thinking—the silver medalists 
talked about their disappointments in having finished second rather 
than first, whereas the bronze medalists focused on how happy they 
were to have finished third rather than fourth. 


Does the bronze medalist look happier to you than the silver medalist?
Does the bronze medalist look happier to you than the silver medalist? 
Medvec, Madey, and Gilovich (1995) found that, on average, bronze medalists 
were happier than silver medalists. Wikimedia Commons – CC BY-SA 2.0. 

You might have experienced counterfactual thinking in other 
situations. I remember once that I was driving across the country 
and my car was having some engine trouble. I really, really wanted to 
make it home when I got near the end of my journey because I could 
tell that I was going to be very disappointed if the car broke down 
only a few miles before I got home (it would have been really easy to 
have imagined making it the whole way, making it even more painful 
if I did not). Counterfactual thinking has even been observed on 
juries—people who are asked to award monetary damages to others 
who had been in an accident offered them substantially more in 
compensation if they were almost not injured than they did if the 
accident did not seem close to not occurring (Miller, Turnbull, & 
McFarland, 1988). 

Again, the moral of the story is clear—our thinking is frequently 
influenced by processes that we are not aware of and that may 
lead us to make judgments that seem reasonable but are objectively 


inaccurate. In the case of counterfactual thinking, the cognitive 
accessibility of the potential alternative outcome leads to some very 
paradoxical effects. 

Anchoring and Adjustment Lead Us to Accept 
Ideas That We Should Revise 

In some cases, we may be aware of the danger of acting on our 
expectations and attempt to adjust for them. Perhaps you have 
been in a situation where you are beginning a course with a new 
professor and you know that a good friend of yours does not like 
him. You may be thinking that you want to go beyond your negative 
expectations and prevent this knowledge from biasing your 
judgment. However, the accessibility of the initial information 
frequently prevents this adjustment from occurring—leading us to 
anchor on the initial construct and not adjust sufficiently. This is 
called the problem of anchoring and adjustment. 

Tversky and Kahneman (1974) asked some of the student 
participants in one of their studies to solve this multiplication 
problem quickly and without using a calculator: 

1 × 2 × 3 × 4 × 5 × 6 × 7 × 8 

They asked other participants to solve this problem: 

8 × 7 × 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 

They found that students who saw the first problem gave an 
estimated answer of about 512, whereas the students who saw the 
second problem estimated about 2,250. Tversky and Kahneman 
argued that the students couldn’t solve the whole problem in their 
head, so they did the first few multiplications and then used the 
outcome of this preliminary calculation as their starting point, or 
anchor. Then the participants used their starting estimate to find 
an answer that sounded plausible. In both cases, the estimates were 
too low relative to the true value of the product (which is 


40,320)—but the first set of guesses was even lower because they 
started from a lower anchor. 

Of course, savvy marketers have long used the anchoring 
phenomenon to help them. You might not be surprised to hear that 
people are more likely to buy more products when they are listed 
as four for $1.00 than when they are listed as $0.25 each (leading 
people to anchor on the four and perhaps adjust only a bit away) and 
when a sign says “buy a dozen” rather than “buy one.” 

And it is no accident that a car salesperson always starts 
negotiating with a high price and then works down. The salesperson 
is trying to get the consumer anchored on the high price with the 
hope that it will have a big influence on the final sale value. 

Overconfidence 

Still another potential judgmental bias, and one that has powerful 
and often negative effects on our judgments, is the tendency to be 
overconfident in our own skills, abilities, and judgments. We often 
have little awareness of our own limitations, leading us to act as if 
we are more certain about things than we should be, particularly 
on tasks that are difficult. Adams and Adams (1960) found that for 
words that were difficult to spell, people were correct in spelling 
them only about 80% of the time, even though they indicated that 
they were “100% certain” that they were correct. David Dunning 
and his colleagues (Dunning, Griffin, Milojkovic, & Ross, 1990) asked 
college students to predict how another student would react in 
various situations. Some participants made predictions about a 
fellow student whom they had just met and interviewed, and others 
made predictions about their roommates. In both cases, 
participants reported their confidence in each prediction, and 
accuracy was determined by the responses of the target persons 
themselves. The results were clear: Regardless of whether they 


judged a stranger or a roommate, the students consistently 
overestimated the accuracy of their own predictions (Figure 2.5). 

Dunning et al.(1990) found that, regardless of whether they were judging strangers or their roommates, students were overconfident. The percentage confidence that they assigned to their own predictions was significantly higher than the actual percentage of their predictions that were correct.
Figure 2.5 

Dunning et al. (1990) found that, regardless of whether they were 
judging strangers or their roommates, students were overconfident. 
The percentage confidence that they assigned to their own 
predictions was significantly higher than the actual percentage of 
their predictions that were correct. 

Making matters even worse, Kruger and Dunning (1999) found 
that people who scored low rather than high on tests of spelling, 
logic, grammar, and humor appreciation were also most likely to 
show overconfidence by overestimating how well they would do. 
Apparently, poor performers are doubly cursed—they not only are 
unable to predict their own skills but also are the most unaware that 
they can’t do so (Dunning, Johnson, Ehrlinger, & Kruger, 2003). 

The tendency to be overconfident in our judgments can have 
some very negative effects. When eyewitnesses testify in 
courtrooms regarding their memories of a crime, they often are 
completely sure that they are identifying the right person. But their 
confidence doesn’t correlate much with their actual accuracy. This 
is, in part, why so many people have been wrongfully convicted on 
the basis of inaccurate eyewitness testimony given by overconfident 
witnesses (Wells & Olson, 2003). 

The Importance of Cognitive Biases in Everyday 



Life 

Perhaps you are thinking that the use of heuristics and the 
tendency to be influenced by salience and accessibility don’t seem 
that important—who really cares if we buy an iPod when the Zune 
is better, or if we think there are more words that begin with the 
letter 
R than there actually are? These aren’t big problems in the 
overall scheme of things. But it turns out that what seems perhaps 
to be pretty small errors and biases on the surface can have 
profound consequences for people. 

For one, if the errors occur for a lot of people, they can really add 
up. Why would so many people continue to buy lottery tickets or 
to gamble their money in casinos when the likelihood of them ever 
winning is so low? One possibility, of course, is the representative 
heuristic—people ignore the low base rates of winning and focus 
their attention on the salient likelihood of winning a huge prize. And 
the belief in astrology, which all scientific evidence suggests is not 
accurate, is probably driven in part by the salience of the occasions 
when the predictions do occur—when a horoscope is correct (which 
it will, of course, be sometimes), the correct prediction is highly 
salient and may allow people to maintain the (overall false) belief. 

People may also take more care to prepare for unlikely events 
than for more likely ones because the unlikely ones are more salient 
or accessible. For instance, people may think that they are more 
likely to die from a terrorist attack or as a result of homicide than 
they are from diabetes, stroke, or tuberculosis. But the odds are 
much greater of dying from the health problems than from 
terrorism or homicide. Because people don’t accurately calibrate 
their behaviors to match the true potential risks, the individual and 
societal costs are quite large (Slovic, 2000). 

Salience and accessibility also color how we perceive our social 
worlds, which may have a big influence on our behavior. For 
instance, people who watch a lot of violent television shows also 
tend to view the world as more dangerous in comparison to those 


who watch less violent TV (Doob & Macdonald, 1979). This follows 
from the idea that our judgments are based on the accessibility 
of relevant constructs. We also overestimate our contribution to 
joint projects (Ross & Sicoly, 1979), perhaps in part because our own 
contributions are so obvious and salient, whereas the contributions 
of others are much less so. And the use of cognitive heuristics 
can even affect our views about global warming. Joireman, Barnes, 
Truelove, and Duell (2010) found that people were more likely to 
believe in the existence of global warming when they were asked 
about it on hotter rather than colder days and when they had first 
been primed with words relating to heat. Thus the principles of 
salience and accessibility, because they are such an important part 
of our social judgments, can create a series of biases that can make 
a difference. 

Research has found that even people who should know 
better—and who need to know better—are subject to cognitive 
biases. Economists, stock traders, managers, lawyers, and even 
doctors have been found to make the same kinds of mistakes in 
their professional activities that people make in their everyday lives 
(Byrne & McEleney, 2000; Gilovich, Griffin, & Kahneman, 2002; 
Hilton, 2001). And the use of cognitive heuristics is increased when 
people are under time pressure (Kruglanski & Freund, 1983) or when 
they feel threatened (Kassam, Koslov, & Mendes, 2009), exactly the 
situations that may occur when professionals are required to make 
their decisions. 

Although biases are common, they are not impossible to control, 
and psychologists and other scientists are working to help people 
make better decisions. One possibility is to provide people with 
better feedback. Weather forecasters, for instance, are quite 
accurate in their decisions, in part because they are able to learn 
from the clear feedback that they get about the accuracy of their 
predictions. Other research has found that accessibility biases can 
be reduced by leading people to consider multiple alternatives 
rather than focusing only on the most obvious ones, and particularly 
by leading people to think about exactly the opposite possible 


outcomes than the ones they are expecting (Hirt, Kardes, & 
Markman, 2004). And people can also be trained to make better 
decisions. For instance, Lehman, Lempert, and Nisbett (1988) found 
that graduate students in medicine, law, and chemistry, but 
particularly those in psychology, all showed significant 
improvement in their ability to reason correctly over the course of 
their graduate training. 

Social Psychology in the Public Interest 

The Validity of Eyewitness Testimony 

As we have seen in the story of Rickie Johnson that opens 
this chapter, one social situation in which the accuracy of 
our person-perception skills is vitally important in the area 
of eyewitness testimony (Charman & Wells, 2007; Toglia, 
Read, Ross, & Lindsay, 2007; Wells, Memon, & Penrod, 
2006). Every year, thousands of individuals such as Rickie 
Johnson are charged with and often convicted of crimes 
based largely on eyewitness evidence. In fact, more than 
100 people who were convicted prior to the existence of 
forensic DNA have now been exonerated by DNA tests, and 
more than 75% of these people were victims of mistaken 
eyewitness identification (Wells, Memon, & Penrod, 2006; 
Fisher, 2011). 

The judgments of eyewitnesses are often incorrect, and 
there is only a small correlation between how accurate and 
how confident an eyewitness is. Witnesses are frequently 
overconfident, and one who claims to be absolutely certain 
about his or her identification is not much more likely to be 
accurate than one who appears much less sure, making it 


almost impossible to determine whether a particular 
witness is accurate or not (Wells & Olson, 2003). 

To accurately remember a person or an event at a later 
time, we must be able to accurately see and store the 
information in the first place, keep it in memory over time, 
and then accurately retrieve it later. But the social situation 
can influence any of these processes, causing errors and 
biases. 

In terms of initial encoding of the memory, crimes 
normally occur quickly, often in situations that are 
accompanied by a lot of stress, distraction, and arousal. 
Typically, the eyewitness gets only a brief glimpse of the 
person committing the crime, and this may be under poor 
lighting conditions and from far away. And the eyewitness 
may not always focus on the most important aspects of the 
scene. Weapons are highly salient, and if a weapon is 
present during the crime, the eyewitness may focus on the 
weapon, which would draw his or her attention away from 
the individual committing the crime (Steblay, 1997). In one 
relevant study, Loftus, Loftus, and Messo (1987) showed 
people slides of a customer walking up to a bank teller and 
pulling out either a pistol or a checkbook. By tracking eye 
movements, the researchers determined that people were 
more likely to look at the gun than at the checkbook and 
that this reduced their ability to accurately identify the 
criminal in a lineup that was given later. 

People may be particularly inaccurate when they are 
asked to identify members of a race other than their own 
(Brigham, Bennett, Meissner, & Mitchell, 2007). In one field 
study, for example, Meissner and Brigham (2001) sent 
White, Black, and Hispanic students into convenience 
stores in El Paso, Texas. Each of the students made a 


purchase, and the researchers came in later to ask the 
clerks to identify photos of the shoppers. Results showed 
that the White, Black, and Mexican American clerks 
demonstrated the own-race bias: They were all more 
accurate at identifying customers belonging to their own 
racial or ethnic group than they were at identifying people 
from other groups. There seems to be some truth to the 
adage that “They all look alike”—at least if an individual is 
looking at someone who is not of his or her race. 

Collage: three sisters posing for a picture, two sisters hugging, two brothers at Christmas
One source of error in eyewitness testimony is the relative difficulty 
of accurately identifying people who are not of one’s own race. Kira 
Westland – sisters – CC BY-NC-ND 2.0; Dillan K – Sisters – CC 
BY-NC-ND 2.0; Bill Lile – Robertos Brothers – CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. 

Even if information gets encoded properly, memories 
may become distorted over time. For one thing, people 
might discuss what they saw with other people, or they 
might read the information relating to it from other 
bystanders or in the media. Such postevent information can 
distort the original memories such that the witnesses are 
no longer sure what the real information is and what was 
provided later. The problem is that the new, inaccurate 
information is highly cognitively accessible, whereas the 
older information is much less so. Even describing a face 


makes it more difficult to recognize the face later (Dodson, 
Johnson, & Schooler, 1997). 

In an experiment by Loftus and Palmer (1974), 
participants viewed a film of a traffic accident and then, 
according to random assignment to experimental 
conditions, answered one of three questions: 

1. “About how fast were the cars going when they hit 
each other?” 
2. “About how fast were the cars going when they 
smashed each other?” 
3. “About how fast were the cars going when they 
contacted each other?” 


As you can see in the following figure, although all the 
participants saw the same accident, their estimates of the 
speed of the cars varied by condition. People who had seen 
the “smashed” question estimated the highest average 
speed, and those who had seen the “contacted” question 
estimated the lowest. 

Participants viewed a film of a traffic accident and then answered a question about the accident. According to random assignment, the blank was filled by either “hit,” “smashed,” or “contacted” each other. The wording of the question influenced the participants’ memory of the accident. Data are from Loftus and Palmer (1974).
Figure 
2.6 
Reconstructive 
Memory 

Participants viewed a film of a traffic accident and then 
answered a question about the accident. According to 
random assignment, the blank was filled by either “hit,” 
“smashed,” or “contacted” each other. The wording of the 
question influenced the participants’ memory of the 
accident. Data are from Loftus and Palmer (1974). 



The situation is particularly problematic when the 
eyewitnesses are children because research has found that 
children are more likely to make incorrect identifications 
than are adults (Pozzulo & Lindsay, 1998) and are also 
subject to the own-race identification bias (Pezdek, 
Blandon-Gitlin, & Moore, 2003). In many cases, when sex 
abuse charges have been filed against babysitters, teachers, 
religious officials, and family members, the children are the 
only source of evidence. The likelihood that children are 
not accurately remembering the events that have occurred 
to them creates substantial problems for the legal system. 

Another setting in which eyewitnesses may be inaccurate 
is when they try to identify suspects from mug shots or 
lineups. A lineup generally includes the suspect and five to 
seven other innocent people (the fillers), and the 
eyewitness must pick out the true perpetrator. The 
problem is that eyewitnesses typically feel pressured to 
pick a suspect out of the lineup, which increases the 
likelihood that they will mistakenly pick someone (rather 
than no one) as the suspect. 

Research has attempted to better understand how people 
remember and potentially misremember the scenes of and 
people involved in crimes and to attempt to improve how 
the legal system makes use of eyewitness testimony. In 
many states, efforts are being made to better inform 
judges, juries, and lawyers about how inaccurate 
eyewitness testimony can be. Guidelines have also been 
proposed to help ensure those child witnesses are 
questioned in a nonbiased way (Poole & Lamb, 1998). Steps 
can also be taken to ensure that lineups yield more 
accurate eyewitness identifications. Lineups are fairer 
when the fillers resemble the suspect when the interviewer 


makes it clear that the suspect might or might not be 
present (Steblay, Dysart, Fulero, & Lindsay, 2001), and when 
the eyewitness has not been shown the same pictures in a 
mug-shot book prior to the lineup decision. And several 
recent studies have found that witnesses who make 
accurate identifications from a lineup reach their decision 
faster than do witnesses who make mistaken 
identifications, suggesting that authorities must take into 
consideration not only the response but how fast it is given 
(Dunning & Perretta, 2002). 

In addition to distorting our memories for events that 
have actually occurred, misinformation may lead us to 
falsely remember information that never occurred. Loftus 
and her colleagues asked parents to provide them with 
descriptions of events that did (e.g., moving to a new house) 
and did not (e.g., being lost in a shopping mall) happen to 
their children. Then (without telling the children which 
events were real or made-up) the researchers asked the 
children to imagine both types of events. The children were 
instructed to “think real hard” about whether the events 
had occurred (Ceci, Huffman, Smith, & Loftus, 1994). More 
than half of the children generated stories regarding at 
least one of the made-up events, and they remained 
insistent that the events did in fact occur even when told by 
the researcher that they could not possibly have occurred 
(Loftus & Pickrell, 1995). Even college students are 
susceptible to manipulations that make events that did not 
actually occur seem as if they did (Mazzoni, Loftus, & 
Kirsch, 2001). 

The ease with which memories can be created or 
implanted is particularly problematic when the events to be 
recalled have important consequences. Therapists often 


argue that patients may repress memories of traumatic 
events they experienced as children, such as childhood 
sexual abuse, and then recover the events years later as the 
therapist leads them to recall the information—for instance, 
by using dream interpretation and hypnosis (Brown, 
Scheflin, & Hammond, 1998). 

But other researchers argue that painful memories such 
as sexual abuse are usually very well remembered, that few 
memories are actually repressed and that even if they are, it 
is virtually impossible for patients to accurately retrieve 
them years later (McNally, Bryant, & Ehlers, 2003; Pope, 
Poliakoff, Parker, Boynes, & Hudson, 2007). These 
researchers have argued that the procedures used by the 
therapists to “retrieve” the memories are more likely to 
actually implant false memories, leading the patients to 
erroneously recall events that did not actually occur. 
Because hundreds of people have been accused, and even 
imprisoned, on the basis of claims about “recovered 
memory” of child sexual abuse, the accuracy of these 
memories has important societal implications. Many 
psychologists now believe that most of these claims of 
recovered memories are due to implanted, rather than real, 
memories (Loftus & Ketcham, 1994). 

Taken together, then, the problems of eyewitness 
testimony represent another example of how social 
cognition—the processes that we use to size up and 
remember other people—may be influenced, sometimes in a 
way that creates inaccurate perceptions, by the operation 
of salience, cognitive accessibility, and other information-
processing biases. 


End-of-Chapter Summary 

Key Takeaways 

We use our schemas and attitudes to help us judge 
and respond to others. In many cases, this is 
appropriate, but our expectations can also lead to 
biases in our judgments of ourselves and others. 
A good part of our social cognition is spontaneous 
or automatic, operating without much thought or 
effort. On the other hand, when we have the time and 
the motivation to think about things carefully, we may 
engage in thoughtful, controlled cognition. 
Which expectations we use to judge others are 
based on both the situational salience of the things 
we are judging and the cognitive accessibility of our 
own schemas and attitudes. 
Variations in the accessibility of schemas lead to 
biases such as the availability heuristic, the 
representativeness heuristic, the false consensus 
bias, and biases caused by counterfactual thinking. 
The potential biases that are the result of everyday 
social cognition can have important consequences, 
both for us in our everyday lives but even for people 
who make important decisions affecting many other 
people. Although biases are common, they are not 
impossible to control, and psychologists and other 



scientists are working to help people make better 
decisions. 
The operation of cognitive biases, including the 
potential for new information to distort information 
already in memory, can help explain the tendency for 
eyewitnesses to be overconfident and frequently 
inaccurate in their recollections of what occurred at 
crime scenes. 


Exercises & Critical Thinking 

1. Give an example of a time when you may have 
committed one of the cognitive errors listed in 
Table 
2.1 “How Expectations Influence Our Social 
Cognition”. What factors (e.g., availability? salience?) 
caused the error, and what was the outcome of your 
use of the shortcut or heuristic? 
2. Go to the website 
http://thehothand.blogspot.com, 
which analyzes the extent to which people accurately 
perceive “streakiness” in sports. Consider how our 
sports perceptions are influenced by our 
expectations and the use of cognitive heuristics. 



References 

Aarts, H., & Dijksterhuis, A. (1999). How often did I do it? 
Experienced ease of retrieval and frequency estimates of past 
behavior. 
Acta Psychologica, 103(1–2), 77–89. 

Adams, P. A., & Adams, J. K. (1960). Confidence in the recognition 
and reproduction of words difficult to spell. 
American Journal of 
Psychology, 73, 544–552. 

Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of social 
behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and stereotype 
activation on action. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
71(2), 230–244. 

Brewer, M. B. (1988). A dual-process model of impression formation. 
In T. K. Srull & R. S. Wyer (Eds.), Advances in social cognition 
(Vol. 
1, pp. 1–36). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Brigham, J. C., Bennett, L. B., Meissner, C. A., & Mitchell, T. L. (Eds.). 
(2007). 
The influence of race on eyewitness memory. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 

Brown, D., Scheflin, A. W., & Hammond, D. C. (1998). 
Memory, 
trauma treatment, and the law. New York, NY: Norton. 

Byrne, R. M. J., & McEleney, A. (2000). Counterfactual thinking about 
actions and failures to act. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(5), 1318–1331. 

Ceci, S. J., Huffman, M. L. C., Smith, E., & Loftus, E. F. (1994). 
Repeatedly thinking about a non-event: Source misattributions 
among preschoolers. 
Consciousness and Cognition: An 
International Journal, 3(3–4), 388–407. 

Chambers, J. R. (2008). Explaining false uniqueness: Why we are 
both better and worse than others. 
Social and Personality 
Psychology Compass, 2(2), 878–894. 

Charman, S. D., & Wells, G. L. (2007). Eyewitness lineups: Is 
appearance-changes instruction a good idea? Law and Human 
Behavior, 31(1), 3–22. 

Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. F., & van Baaren, R. B. 


(2006). On making the right choice: The deliberation-without-
attention effect. 
Science, 311(5763), 1005–1007. 

Dodson, C. S., Johnson, M. K., & Schooler, J. W. (1997). The verbal 
overshadowing effect: Why descriptions impair face 
recognition. 
Memory & Cognition, 25(2), 129–139. 

Doob, A. N., & Macdonald, G. E. (1979). Television viewing and fear 
of victimization: Is the relationship causal? 
Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 37(2), 170–179. 

Dunning, D., Griffin, D. W., Milojkovic, J. D., & Ross, L. (1990). The 
overconfidence effect in social prediction. 
Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 58(4), 568–581. 

Dunning, D., Johnson, K., Ehrlinger, J., & Kruger, J. (2003). Why 
people fail to recognize their own incompetence. 
Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 12(3), 83–87. 

Dunning, D., & Perretta, S. (2002). Automaticity and eyewitness 
accuracy: A 10- to 12-second rule for distinguishing accurate from 
inaccurate positive identifications. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 
87(5), 951–962. 

Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2003). The constructive nature of 
automatic evaluation. In J. Musch & K. C. Klauer (Eds.), 
The 
psychology of evaluation: Affective processes in cognition and 
emotion 
(pp. 169–188). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
Publishers. 

Ferguson, M. J., Hassin, R., & Bargh, J. A. (2008). Implicit motivation: 
Past, present, and future. In J. Y. Shah & W. L. Gardner 
(Eds.), 
Handbook of motivation science 
(pp. 150–166). New York, 
NY: Guilford Press. 

Fisher, R. P. (2011). Editor’s introduction: Special issue on psychology 
and law. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 4. 
doi:10.1177/0963721410397654 

Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., & Kahneman, D. (Eds.). (2002). 
Heuristics 
and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Haddock, G., Rothman, A. J., Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Forming 
judgments of attitude certainty, intensity, and importance: The 


role of subjective experiences. 
Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 25, 771–782. 

Hilton, D. J. (2001). The psychology of financial decision-making: 
Applications to trading, dealing, and investment analysis. 
Journal 
of Behavioral Finance, 2, 37–53. doi: 10.1207/
S15327760JPFM0201_4 

Hirt, E. R., Kardes, F. R., & Markman, K. D. (2004). Activating a 
mental simulation mind-set through generation of alternatives: 
Implications for debiasing in related and unrelated 
domains. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40(3), 
374–383. 

Joireman, J., Barnes Truelove, H., & Duell, B. (2010). Effect of outdoor 
temperature, heat primes and anchoring on belief in global 
warming. 
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30(4), 358–367. 

Kassam, K. S., Koslov, K., & Mendes, W. B. (2009). Decisions under 
distress: Stress profiles influence anchoring and 
adjustment. 
Psychological Science, 20(11), 1394–1399. 

Krueger, J., & Clement, R. W. (1994). The truly false consensus effect: 
An ineradicable and egocentric bias in social perception. 
Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(4), 596–610. 

Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How 
difficulties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to 
inflated self-assessments. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 77(6), 1121–1134. 

Kruglanski, A. W., & Freund, T. (1983). The freezing and unfreezing 
of lay inferences: Effects on impressional primacy, ethnic 
stereotyping, and numerical anchoring. 
Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 19, 
448–468. 

Lehman, D. R., Lempert, R. O., & Nisbett, R. E. (1988). The effects 
of graduate training on reasoning: Formal discipline and thinking 
about everyday-life events. 
American Psychologist, 43(6), 431–442. 

Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N. (2001). Risk 
as feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127(2), 267–286. 

Loftus, E. F., & Ketcham, K. (1994). 
The myth of repressed memory: 


False memories and allegations of sexual abuse 
(1st ed.). New York, 
NY: St. Martin’s Press. 

Loftus, E. F., Loftus, G. R., & Messo, J. (1987). Some facts about 
“weapon focus.” 
Law and Human Behavior, 11(1), 55–62. 

Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction of automobile 
destruction: An example of the interaction between language and 
memory. 
Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 13(5), 
585–589. 

Loftus, E. F., & Pickrell, J. E. (1995). The formation of false 
memories. 
Psychiatric Annals, 25(12), 720–725. 

Mazzoni, G. A. L., Loftus, E. F., & Kirsch, I. (2001). Changing beliefs 
about implausible autobiographical events: A little plausibility 
goes a long way. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 7(1), 
51–59. 

McArthur, L. Z., & Post, D. L. (1977). Figural emphasis and person 
perception. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13(6), 
520–535. 

McNally, R.J., Bryant, R. A., & Ehlers, A. (2003). Does early 
psychological intervention promote recovery from posttraumatic 
stress? 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4(2), 45-79. 

Medvec, V. H., Madey, S. F., & Gilovich, T. (1995). When less is more: 
Counterfactual thinking and satisfaction among Olympic 
medalists. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(4), 
603–610. 

Meissner, C. A., & Brigham, J. C. (2001). Thirty years of investigating 
the own-race bias in memory for faces: A meta-analytic 
review. 
Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7(1), 3–35. 

Miller, D. T., Turnbull, W., & McFarland, C. (1988). Particularistic and 
universalistic evaluation in the social comparison process. 
Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 908–917. 

Pezdek, K., Blandon-Gitlin, I., & Moore, C. (2003). Children’s face 
recognition memory: More evidence for the cross-race 
effect. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(4), 760–763. 

Poole, D. A., & Lamb, M. E. (1998). 
The development of interview 
protocols. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 


Pope, H. G., Jr., Poliakoff, M. B., Parker, M. P., Boynes, M., & Hudson, 
J. I. (2007). Is dissociative amnesia a culture-bound syndrome? 
Findings from a survey of historical literature. 
Psychological 
Medicine: A Journal of Research in Psychiatry and the Allied 
Sciences, 37(2), 225–233. 

Pozzulo, J. D., & Lindsay, R. C. L. (1998). Identification accuracy of 
children versus adults: A meta-analysis. 
Law and Human Behavior, 
22(5), 549–570. 

Reber, R., Winkielman, P., & Schwarz, N. (1998). Effects of perceptual 
fluency on affective judgments. 
Psychological Science, 9(1), 45–48. 
Winkielman, P., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2001). Mind at ease puts a smile 
on the face: Psychophysiological evidence that processing 
facilitation elicits positive affect. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 81(6), 989–1000. 

Roese, N. J. (1997). Counterfactual thinking. 
Psychological Bulletin, 
121(1), 133–148. 

Ross, L., Greene, D., & House, P. (1977). The false consensus effect: 
An egocentric bias in social perception and attribution 
processes. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13(3), 
279–301. 

Ross, M., & Sicoly, F. (1979). Egocentric biases in availability and 
attribution. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(3), 
322–336. 

Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Strack, F., Klumpp, G., Rittenauer-Schatka, 
H., & Simons, A. (1991). Ease of retrieval as information: Another 
look at the availability heuristic. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 61, 
195–202. 

Schwarz, N., & Vaughn, L. A. (Eds.). (2002). 
The availability heuristic 
revisited: Ease of recall and content of recall as distinct sources of 
information. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Sloman, S. A. (Ed.). (2002). 
Two systems of reasoning. New York, 
NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Slovic, P. (Ed.). (2000). 
The perception of risk. London, England: 
Earthscan Publications. 

Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (Eds.). (2002). 
Individual differences in 


reasoning: Implications for the rationality debate? 
New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Steblay, N., Dysart, J., Fulero, S., & Lindsay, R. C. L. (2001). Eyewitness 
accuracy rates in sequential and simultaneous lineup 
presentations: A meta-analytic comparison. 
Law and Human 
Behavior, 25(5), 459–473. 

Steblay, N. M. (1997). Social influence in eyewitness recall: A meta-
analytic review of lineup instruction effects. 
Law and Human 
Behavior, 21(3), 283–297. 

Taylor, S. E., & Fiske, S. T. (1978). Salience, attention and attribution: 
Top of the head phenomena. 
Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, 11, 
249–288. 

Toglia, M. P., Read, J. D., Ross, D. F., & Lindsay, R. C. L. (Eds.). 
(2007). 
The handbook of eyewitness psychology 
(Vols. 1 & 2). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for 
judging frequency and probability. 
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 
207–232. 

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: 
Heuristics and biases. 
Science, 185(4157), 1124–1131. 

Wells, G. L., Memon, A., & Penrod, S. D. (2006). Eyewitness evidence: 
Improving its probative value. 
Psychological Science in the Public 
Interest, 7(2), 45–75. 

Wells, G. L., & Olson, E. A. (2003). Eyewitness testimony. 
Annual 
Review of Psychology, 54, 277–295. 

Willis, J., & Todorov, A. (2006). First impressions: Making up your 
mind after a 100-Ms exposure to a face. 
Psychological Science, 
17(7), 592–598. 

Winkielman, P., Schwarz, N., & Nowak, A. (Eds.). (2002). 
Affect and 
processing dynamics: Perceptual fluency enhances evaluations. 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 


Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 2.2 from Principles of Social Psychology by 
the University of Minnesota under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, 
except where otherwise noted. 


PART 
II 
THE BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL 
DIMENSION 

Learning Objectives: 

Describe the Disease and Medical Models 
Describe Social Learning Theory 
Explore how biological functioning impacts our 
overall health 


Vignette 

Jason covering face with hands
Photo by Christian Erfurt on Unsplash 

Jason’s parents have been 
called by the school social 
worker to discuss concerns 
related to fighting with a peer 
and declining grades. His 
parents report concerns at home 
with poor sibling relationships, 
anger issues, and “a bad attitude, 
always talking back, never 
listening or doing what we ask 
him to do”. They report a long family history of substance abuse and 


mental health issues (anxiety and depression). They report increased 
concerns related to this as they recently found marijuana in Jason’s 
room. Jason (14 y/o) reports “My parents don’t know what they’re 
talking about. My little brother and sister just get me in trouble 
because I don’t let them touch my stuff, besides, my parents don’t care, 
they don’t listen to me, they just want me to do what they say. And I 
don’t see what the big deal is with me smoking a little weed, it helps 
me feel better and not be so mad all the time.” 

*We will continue use of this vignette for this section as well. 

The BioPsychoSocial Dimension allows us to take 
a more specific look into theories and models as 
we explore client issues or concerns. 

The Disease Model is a problem-oriented approach concerned with 
identifying a problem or dysfunction and providing an intervention 
to “cure” the behavioral or physiological problem. Focusing on the 
problem first is how many people are used to working when trying 
to find a solution. While we work in a strengths-based approach, the 
disease model is popular in many health care settings, and having 
understanding of use of this model allows for communication and 
collaboration with other professionals that may also be involved in 
the client’s care. 

The Medical Model is a disease-based model focused on 
identifying a disease based on symptoms, and then curing or 
alleviating the problem through scientific examination and 
intervention. An example of this would be use of the Diagnostic and 
Statistical of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) in clinical social work to 
assess symptoms reported by a client and then determine the 
correct diagnosis, which leads to chosen treatment modalities. This 
model has been widely used in social work and other professions to 
help conceptualize problems and interventions. 

 



Observational Learning: 

Thumbnail for the embedded element "Observational learning: Bobo doll experiment and social cognitive theory | MCAT | Khan Academy"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=23 

 


Social Learning Theory states people learn by observing others 
and are active in their learning. 

Jason’s story – We can utilize Social Learning Theory to 
explore how Jason may have learned to express his 
emotions (how did/do parents or other influential people 
in his life express their emotions), use of different coping 
skills or trying out new behaviors (drug use by peers/
other family members, isolation/withdrawal), 


communication style, and problem-solving skills to 
discover and understand where behaviors were learned, 
how they impact, and in determining how to best provide 
needed supports. 

We will take a deeper look at some key elements of human biology 
in the following videos with an exploration of the brain, neurological 
functions, and genetics and their connection to wellness and how 
they can contribute/impact disease and issues related to this. 

The Brain: The first two videos are short videos that 
explore the brain, different ways it may function, and 
how stress can impact brain functions. The second two 
videos are a bit longer and will explore how we 
perceive others and increasing our own self awareness 
for a healthy mind. 

Human Brain: Major Structures and their Functions. 


Thumbnail for the embedded element "Human Brain: Major Structures and their Functions"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=23 

The Neurobiology of Stress on Brain Function. 


Thumbnail for the embedded element "The Neurobiology of Stress on Brain Function"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=23 

What do others think of you? How the brain perceives other 
people: 


Thumbnail for the embedded element "What do others think of you? How the brain perceives other people | Dong Seon-Chang | TEDxStuttgart"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=23 

What is a Healthy Mind?: 


Thumbnail for the embedded element "What is a Healthy Mind? Daniel Siegel"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=23 

Executive Function and Self Regulation skills are the mental 
processes that enable us to plan, focus attention, remember 
instructions, and juggle multiple tasks successfully. The brain needs 
this skill set to filter distractions, prioritize tasks, set and achieve 
goals, and control impulses. 

3 types of brain functions: 


1. Working memory governs our ability 
to retain and manipulate distinct pieces 
of information over short periods of 
time. 
2. Mental flexibility helps us to sustain 
or shift attention in response to 
different demands or to apply different 
rules in different settings. 


3. Self-control enables us to set 
priorities and resists impulsive actions 
or responses. 




 


These functions are highly interrelated, and the successful 
application of executive function skills requires them to operate in 
coordination with each other. 

Children are not born with these skills—they are born with the 
potential to develop them. If children do not receive appropriate 
and healthy responses to their needs from their relationships with 
adults and the conditions in their environments, their skill 
development can be seriously delayed or impaired. 

It would be important to explore executive functioning 


and self-regulation skills with Jason to determine if a 
referral to other supports such as developmental therapy 
(possible cognitive delays) or occupational therapy 
(possible sensory issues) are needed. 

Functions of the Nervous System: 

Thumbnail for the embedded element "Functions of the nervous system | Organ Systems | MCAT | Khan Academy"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=23 

It is important to recognize our internal systems are interconnected 
and are affected by one another. Ex: how chronic stress can impact 
our physical health, emotional health, and functioning. 


How might Jason’s physical and mental health be 
impacted by increased stress? 

Genetics: 

Thumbnail for the embedded element "Twins: A window into human nature | Nancy Segal | TEDxManhattanBeach"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=23 

Here we look at the exploration of genetics and environment and 
come back to the age old question – nature vs nurture? Does one 
have a stronger impact than the other in shaping who we are and 
how we respond to our world? As in most cases, you will need to 
look at both and determine which may be impacting your client 
more. 


Jason may be influenced more strongly to explore drug 
use and experience mental health issues due to his family 
genetics and history. He may also be influenced more 
strongly at this time due to his stage of development 
where peer approval/acceptance is the driving factor in 
many of his choices. 

Please continue on to Chapter 3: Lifespan Theories to learn more 
about Erikson’s Psychosocial development, Piaget’s Cognitive 
development, Frued’s Psychosexual development, and Kohlberg’s 
Theory of Moral development. 

Key Takeaways: 

Social Learning Theory explores how 
observations of others and their responses to us 
shape our learning and responses to various 
feelings, situations, and others. 
Piaget’s Theories of Cognitive Development 
states people develop cognitively from birth 
through teenage years in universal stages. 
Erikson’s Theories of Psychosocial Development 
includes 8 stages we engage in throughout our 
lifetime with the goal of learning to trust others, 
to be independent, to pursue goals and interests, 
to be productive and successful, to develop a 



sense of identity, to look for closeness and 
intimacy in relationships, to begin investing in 
work, families, and communities and focus on 
others, and finally to reflect on lives to either 
develop a sense of well-being or of despair. 
Freud’s Theory of Psychosexual Development 
states our moral self is shaped by society’s morals 
and values which gives us our sense of right and 
wrong. Anxiety or guilt is used to keep the ego and 
id in check. 
We took a deeper look at biological functioning 
with the brain, nervous system, and genetics and 
impacts they have on our overall health and 
functioning. 


References 

Rogers, A. (2013). Human behavior in the social environment (Fourth 
Edition.). New York: Routledge. 

Video Attributions 

Khanacademymedicine. (2014, April 24). Functions of the Nervous 
System. Organ Systems [Video file]. Youtube. 
Standard YouTube 
License. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qrK-FBdjGk4 

Khanacademymedicine. (2013, September 17). Observational 
learning: Bobo doll experiment and social cognitive theory [Video 


file]. Youtube. Standard YouTube License. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wf3-tRpmGmY 

MedXclusive Learning. (2016, September 22). Human Brain: Major 
Structures and their Functions [Video file]. Youtube. Standard 
YouTube License. 
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=EeE7Fpg061I 

Scienceandnonduality. (2019, February 21). What is a Healthy 
Mind? Dan Siegel [Video file]. Youtube. Standard YouTube License. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-A_aYHEac6I 

TEDx Talks. (2017, December 8). Twins: A window into human 
nature [Video file]. Youtube. Standard YouTube License. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2__1Jrcpv4 

TEDx Talks. (2015, November 19). What do others think of you? 
How the brain perceives other people [Video file]. Youtube. 
Standard YouTube License. 
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=dfcnlADSuQ4 

Yale School of Medicine. (2019, July 15). The Neurobiology of 
Stress on Brain Function [Video file]. Youtube. Standard YouTube 
License. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9EvpJ9gZPI 

 



Chapter 2: Lifespan Theories 

Chapter 2 Learning Objectives 

Discuss Freud’s Theory of psychosexual 
development. 
Describe the major tasks of child and adult 
psychosocial development according to Erikson. 
Discuss Piaget’s view of cognitive development and 
apply the stages to understanding childhood 
cognition. 
Describe Kohlberg’s theory of moral development. 


Freud 

Psychosexual Theory of Development 

Sigmund 
Freud (1856–1939) believed that personality develops 
during early childhood. For Freud, childhood experiences shape our 
personalities and behavior as adults. Freud viewed development 
as discontinuous; he believed that each of us must pass through 
a serious of stages during childhood and that if we lack proper 


nurturance and parenting during a stage, we may become stuck, 
or fixated, in that stage. Freud’s stages are called the stages of 
psychosexual development. According to Freud, children’s pleasure-
seeking urges are focused on a different area of the body, called an 
erogenous zone, at each of the five stages of development: oral, anal, 
phallic, latency, and genital. 

While most of Freud’s ideas have not found support in modern 
research, we cannot discount the contributions that Freud has 
made to the field of psychology. Psychologists, today dispute 
Freud’s psychosexual stages as a legitimate explanation for how 
one’s personality develops, but what we can take away from Freud’s 
theory is that personality is shaped, in some part, by experiences 
we have in childhood. These stages are discussed in detail in the 
chapter on personality. 

Erikson 

Psychosocial Theory of Development 

Erik 
Erikson (1902–1994) (Figure 1), another stage theorist, took 
Freud’s theory and modified it as psychosocial theory. Erikson’s 
psychosocial development theory emphasizes the social nature of 
our development rather than its sexual nature. While Freud believed 
that personality is shaped only in childhood, Erikson proposed that 
personality development takes place all through the lifespan. 
Erikson suggested that how we interact with others is what affects 
our sense of self, or what he called the ego identity. 


A photograph depicts Erik Erikson in his later years.
Erik Erikson 
proposed the 
psychosocial 
theory of 
development. 
In each stage 
of Erikson’s 
theory, there 
is a 
psychosocial 
task that we 
must master 
in order to 
feel a sense 
of 
competence. 
(Figure 1). 

Erikson proposed that we are motivated by a need to achieve 
competence in certain areas of our lives. According to psychosocial 
theory, we experience eight stages of development over our 
lifespan, from infancy through late adulthood. At each stage, there 
is a conflict, or task, that we need to resolve. Successful completion 
of each developmental task results in a sense of competence and a 
healthy personality. Failure to master these tasks leads to feelings of 
inadequacy. 

According to Erikson (1963), trust is the basis of our development 
during infancy (birth to 12 months). Therefore, the primary task 
of this stage is trust versus mistrust. Infants are dependent upon 
their caregivers, so caregivers who are responsive and sensitive to 
their infant’s needs help their baby to develop a sense of trust; their 
baby will see the world as a safe, predictable place. Unresponsive 
caregivers who do not meet their baby’s needs can engender 


feelings of anxiety, fear, and mistrust; their baby may see the world 
as unpredictable. 

As toddlers (ages 1–3 years) begin to explore their world, they 
learn that they can control their actions and act on the environment 
to get results. They begin to show clear preferences for certain 
elements of the environment, such as food, toys, and clothing. A 
toddler’s main task is to resolve the issue of autonomy versus shame 
and doubt, by working to establish independence. This is the “me 
do it” stage. For example, we might observe a budding sense of 
autonomy in a 2-year-old child who wants to choose her clothes 
and dress herself. Although her outfits might not be appropriate 
for the situation, her input in such basic decisions has an effect on 
her sense of independence. If denied the opportunity to act on her 
environment, she may begin to doubt her abilities, which could lead 
to low self-esteem and feelings of shame. 

Once children reach the preschool stage (ages 3–6 years), they 
are capable of initiating activities and asserting control over their 
world through social interactions and play. According to Erikson, 
preschool children must resolve the task of initiative versus guilt. 
By learning to plan and achieve goals while interacting with others, 
preschool children can master this task. Those who do will develop 
self-confidence and feel a sense of purpose. Those who are 
unsuccessful at this stage—with their initiative misfiring or 
stifled—may develop feelings of guilt. How might over-controlling 
parents stifle a child’s initiative? 

During the elementary school stage (ages 6–12), children face 
the task of industry versus inferiority. Children begin to compare 
themselves to their peers to see how they measure up. They either 
develop a sense of pride and accomplishment in their schoolwork, 
sports, social activities, and family life, or they feel inferior and 
inadequate when they don’t measure up. What are some things 
parents and teachers can do to help children develop a sense of 
competence and a belief in themselves and their abilities? 

In adolescence (ages 12–18), children face the task of identity 
versus role confusion. According to Erikson, an adolescent’s main 


task is developing a sense of self. Adolescents struggle with 
questions such as “Who am I?” and “What do I want to do with 
my life?” Along the way, most adolescents try on many different 
selves to see which ones fit. Adolescents who are successful at this 
stage have a strong sense of identity and are able to remain true to 
their beliefs and values in the face of problems and other people’s 
perspectives. What happens to apathetic adolescents, who do not 
make a conscious search for identity, or those who are pressured to 
conform to their parents’ ideas for the future? These teens will have 
a weak sense of self and experience role confusion. They are unsure 
of their identity and confused about the future. 

People in early adulthood (i.e., the 20s through early 40s) are 
concerned with intimacy versus isolation. After we have developed 
a sense of self in adolescence, we are ready to share our life with 
others. Erikson said that we must have a strong sense of self before 
developing intimate relationships with others. Adults who do not 
develop a positive self-concept in adolescence may experience 
feelings of loneliness and emotional isolation. 

When people reach their 40s, they enter the time known as 
middle adulthood, which extends to the mid-60s. The social task 
of middle adulthood is generativity versus stagnation. Generativity 
involves finding your life’s work and contributing to the 
development of others, through activities such as volunteering, 
mentoring, and raising children. Those who do not master this task 
may experience stagnation, having little connection with others and 
little interest in productivity and self-improvement. 

From the mid-60s to the end of life, we are in a period of 
development known as late adulthood. Erikson’s task at this stage is 
called integrity versus despair. He said that people in late adulthood 
reflect on their lives and feel either a sense of satisfaction or a sense 
of failure. People who feel proud of their accomplishments feel a 
sense of integrity, and they can look back on their lives with few 
regrets. However, people who are not successful at this stage may 
feel as if their life has been wasted. They focus on what “would 
have,” “should have,” and “could have” been. They face the end of 


their lives with feelings of bitterness, depression, and despair. Table 
1 summarizes the stages of Erikson’s theory. 

Erikson’s Psychosocial Stages of Development – Table 1 

Stage Age 
(years) 
Developmental 
Task Description 
1 0–1 Trust vs. 
mistrust 
Trust (or mistrust) that basic needs, 
such as nourishment and affection, will 
be met 
2 1–3 Autonomy vs. 
shame/doubt 
Develop a sense of independence in 
many tasks 
3 3–6 Initiative vs. 
guilt 
Take initiative on some activities—may 
develop guilt when unsuccessful or 
boundaries overstepped 
4 7–11 Industry vs. 
inferiority 
Develop self-confidence in abilities 
when competent or sense of inferiority 
when not 
5 12–18 Identity vs. 
confusion 
Experiment with and develop identity 
and roles 
6 19–29 Intimacy vs. 
isolation 
Establish intimacy and relationships 
with others 
7 30–64 Generativity 
vs. stagnation 
Contribute to society and be part of a 
family 
8 65– Integrity vs. 
despair 
Assess and make sense of life and 
meaning of contributions 

Piaget 

Cognitive Theory of Development 

Jean Piaget (1896–1980) is another stage theorist who studied 
childhood development (Figure 2). Instead of approaching 
development from a psychoanalytical or psychosocial perspective, 
Piaget focused on children’s cognitive growth. He believed that 
thinking is a central aspect of development and that children are 


naturally inquisitive. However, he said that children do not think 
and reason like adults (Piaget, 1930, 1932). His theory of cognitive 
development holds that our cognitive abilities develop through 
specific stages, which exemplifies the discontinuity approach to 
development. As we progress to a new stage, there is a distinct shift 
in how we think and reason. 

A photograph depicts Jean Piaget in his later years.
Jean Piaget 
spent over 
50 years 
studying 
children and 
how their 
minds 
develop. 
(Figure 2). 

Piaget said that children develop schemata to help them understand 
the world. 
Schemata are concepts (mental models) that are used to 
help us categorize and interpret information. By the time children 
have reached adulthood, they have created schemata for almost 


everything. When children learn new information, they adjust their 
schemata through two processes: assimilation and accommodation. 
First, they assimilate new information or experiences in terms of 
their current schemata: assimilation is when they take in 
information that is comparable to what they already know. 
Accommodation 
describes when they change their schemata based 
on new information. This process continues as children interact 
with their environment. 

For example, 2-year-old Blake learned the schema for dogs 
because his family has a Labrador retriever. When Blake sees other 
dogs in his picture books, he says, “Look mommy, dog!” Thus, he 
has assimilated them into his schema for dogs. One day, Blake sees 
a sheep for the first time and says, “Look mommy, dog!” Having a 
basic schema that a dog is an animal with four legs and fur, Blake 
thinks all furry, four-legged creatures are dogs. When Blake’s mom 
tells him that the animal he sees is a sheep, not a dog, Blake must 
accommodate his schema for dogs to include more information 
based on his new experiences. Blake’s schema for a dog was too 
broad since not all furry, four-legged creatures are dogs. He now 
modifies his schema for dogs and forms a new one for sheep. 

Like Freud and Erikson, Piaget thought development unfolds in 
a series of stages approximately associated with age ranges. He 
proposed a theory of cognitive development that unfolds in four 
stages: sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operational, and 
formal operational (Table 2). 


Piaget’s Stages of Cognitive Development – Table 2 

Age 
(years) Stage Description Developmental 
issues 
0–2 Sensorimotor The world experienced 
through senses and actions 
Object 
permanence 
Stranger 
anxiety 
2–6 Preoperational 
Use words and images to 
represent things, but lack 
logical reasoning 
Pretend play 
Egocentrism 
Language 
development 
7–11 Concrete 
operational 
Understand concrete events 
and analogies logically; 
perform arithmetical 
operations 
Conservation 
Mathematical 
transformations 
12– Formal 
operational 
Formal operations 
Utilize abstract reasoning 
Abstract logic 
Moral 
reasoning 

The first stage is the 
sensorimotor 
stage, which lasts from birth 
to about 2 years old. During this stage, children learn about the 
world through their senses and motor behavior. Young children put 
objects in their mouths to see if the items are edible, and once 
they can grasp objects, they may shake or bang them to see if they 
make sounds. Between 5 and 8 months old, the child develops 
object 
permanence, which is the understanding that even if something 
is out of sight, it still exists (Bogartz, Shinskey, & Schilling, 2000). 
According to Piaget, young infants do not remember an object after 
it has been removed from sight. Piaget studied infants’ reactions 
when a toy was first shown to an infant and then hidden under 
a blanket. Infants who had already developed object permanence 
would reach for the hidden toy, indicating that they knew it still 
existed, whereas infants who had not developed object permanence 
would appear confused. 

image


Please take a few minutes to view this 
brief video above 


demonstrating different children’s ability to understand object 
permanence. 

In Piaget’s view, around the same time children develop object 
permanence, they also begin to exhibit stranger anxiety, which is 
a fear of unfamiliar people. Babies may demonstrate this by crying 
and turning away from a stranger, by clinging to a caregiver, or 
by attempting to reach their arms toward familiar faces such as 
parents. Stranger anxiety results when a child is unable to assimilate 
the stranger into an existing schema; therefore, she can’t predict 
what her experience with that stranger will be like, which results in 
a fear response. 

Piaget’s second stage is the 
preoperational stage, which is from 
approximately 2 to 7 years old. In this stage, children can use 
symbols to represent words, images, and ideas, which is why 
children in this stage engage in pretend play. A child’s arms might 
become airplane wings as he zooms around the room, or a child 
with a stick might become a brave knight with a sword. Children 
also begin to use language in the preoperational stage, but they 
cannot understand adult logic or mentally manipulate information 
(the term 
operational 
refers to logical manipulation of information, 
so children at this stage are considered to be 
pre-operational). 
Children’s logic is based on their own personal knowledge of the 
world so far, rather than on conventional knowledge. For example, 
dad gave a slice of pizza to 10-year-old Keiko and another slice to 
her 3-year-old brother, Kenny. Kenny’s pizza slice was cut into five 
pieces, so Kenny told his sister that he got more pizza than she did. 
Children in this stage cannot perform mental operations because 
they have not developed an understanding of 
conservation, which is 
the idea that even if you change the appearance of something, it is 
still equal in size as long as nothing has been removed or added. 

During this stage, we also expect children to display 
egocentrism, 
which means that the child is not able to take the perspective of 
others. A child at this stage thinks that everyone sees, thinks, and 
feels just as they do. Let’s look at Kenny and Keiko again. Keiko’s 
birthday is coming up, so their mom takes Kenny to the toy store 


to choose a present for his sister. He selects an Iron Man action 
figure for her, thinking that if he likes the toy, his sister will too. An 
egocentric child is not able to infer the perspective of other people 
and instead attributes his own perspective. 

Piaget’s third stage is the 
concrete operational stage, which 
occurs from about 7 to 11 years old. In this stage, children can think 
logically about real (concrete) events; they have a firm grasp on the 
use of numbers and start to employ memory strategies. They can 
perform mathematical operations and understand transformations, 
such as addition is the opposite of subtraction, and multiplication 
is the opposite of division. In this stage, children also master the 
concept of conservation: Even if something changes shape, its mass, 
volume, and number stay the same. For example, if you pour water 
from a tall, thin glass to a short, fat glass, you still have the same 
amount of water. Remember Keiko and Kenny and the pizza? How 
did Keiko know that Kenny was wrong when he said that he had 
more pizza? 

Children in the concrete operational stage also understand the 
principle of 
reversibility, which means that objects can be changed 
and then returned back to their original form or condition. Take, for 
example, water that you poured into the short, fat glass: You can 
pour water from the fat glass back to the thin glass and still have the 
same amount (minus a couple of drops). 

The fourth, and last, stage in Piaget’s theory is the 
formal 
operational stage, which is from about age 11 to adulthood. Whereas 
children in the concrete operational stage are able to think logically 
only about concrete events, children in the formal operational stage 
can also deal with abstract ideas and hypothetical situations. 
Children in this stage can use abstract thinking to problem solve, 
look at alternative solutions, and test these solutions. In 
adolescence, a renewed egocentrism occurs. For example, a 
15-year-old with a very small pimple on her face might think it 
is huge and incredibly visible, under the mistaken impression that 
others must share her perceptions. 


Beyond Formal Operational Thought 

As with other major contributors to theories of development, 
several of Piaget’s ideas have come under criticism based on the 
results of further research. For example, several contemporary 
studies support a model of development that is more continuous 
than Piaget’s discrete stages (Courage & Howe, 2002; Siegler, 2005, 
2006). Many others suggest that children reach cognitive 
milestones earlier than Piaget describes (Baillargeon, 2004; de Hevia 
& Spelke, 2010). 

According to Piaget, the highest level of cognitive development is 
formal operational thought, which develops between 11 and 20 years 
old. However, many developmental psychologists disagree with 
Piaget, suggesting a fifth stage of cognitive development, known as 
the post formal stage (Basseches, 1984; Commons & Bresette, 2006; 
Sinnott, 1998). In post formal thinking, decisions are made based on 
situations and circumstances, and logic is integrated with emotion 
as adults develop principles that depend on contexts. One way that 
we can see the difference between an adult in post formal thought 
and an adolescent in formal operations is in terms of how they 
handle emotionally charged issues. 

It seems that once we reach adulthood our problem-solving 
abilities change: As we attempt to solve problems, we tend to think 
more deeply about many areas of our lives, such as relationships, 
work, and politics (Labouvie-Vief & Diehl, 1999). Because of this, 
post formal thinkers are able to draw on past experiences to help 
them solve new problems. Problem-solving strategies using post 
formal thought vary, depending on the situation. What does this 
mean? Adults can recognize, for example, that what seems to be an 
ideal solution to a problem at work involving a disagreement with 
a colleague may not be the best solution to a disagreement with a 
significant other. 


Kohlberg 

Theory of Moral Development 

A major task beginning in childhood and continuing into 
adolescence is discerning right from wrong. Psychologist 
Lawrence 
Kohlberg 
(1927–1987) extended upon the foundation that 
Piaget built regarding cognitive development. Kohlberg believed 
that moral development, like cognitive development, follows a series 
of stages. To develop this theory, Kohlberg posed moral dilemmas 
to people of all ages, and then he analyzed their answers to find 
evidence of their particular stage of moral development. Before 
reading about the stages, take a minute to consider how you would 
answer one of Kohlberg’s best-known moral dilemmas, commonly 
known as the Heinz dilemma: 

In Europe, a woman was near death from a special kind 
of cancer. There was one drug that the doctors thought 
might save her. It was a form of radium that a druggist 
in the same town had recently discovered. The drug was 
expensive to make, but the druggist was charging ten times 
what the drug cost him to make. He paid $200 for the radium 
and charged $2,000 for a small dose of the drug. The sick 
woman’s husband, Heinz, went to everyone he knew to 
borrow the money, but he could only get together about 
$1,000, which is half of what it cost. He told the druggist 
that his wife was dying and asked him to sell it cheaper or 
let him pay later. But the druggist said: “No, I discovered the 
drug and I’m going to make money from it.” So Heinz got 
desperate and broke into the man’s store to steal the drug 
for his wife. Should the husband have done that? (Kohlberg, 
1969, p. 379) 

How would you answer this dilemma? Kohlberg was not interested 


in whether you answer yes or no to the dilemma: Instead, he was 
interested in the reasoning behind your answer. 

After presenting people with this and various other moral 
dilemmas, Kohlberg reviewed people’s responses and placed them 
in different 
stages of moral reasoning (Figure 3). According to 
Kohlberg, an individual progresses from the capacity for pre-
conventional mortality (before age 9) to the capacity for 
conventional morality (early adolescence), and toward attaining 
post-conventional morality (once formal operational thought is 
attained), which only a few fully achieve. Kohlberg placed in the 
highest stage responses that reflected the reasoning that Heinz 
should steal the drug because his wife’s life is more important than 
the pharmacist making money. The value of human life overrides the 
pharmacist’s greed. 

Nine boxes are arranged in rows and columns of three. The top left box contains “Level 1, Pre-conventional Morality.” A line connects this box with another box to the right containing “Stage 1, Obedience and punishment: behavior driven by avoiding punishment.” To the right is another box connected by a line containing “Stage 2, Individual interest: behavior driven by self-interest and rewards.” The middle left box contains “Level 2, Conventional Morality.” A line connects this box with another box to the right containing “Stage 3, Interpersonal: behavior driven by social approval.” To the right is another box connected by a line containing “Stage 4, Authority: behavior driven by obeying authority and conforming to social order.” The lower left box contains “Level 3, Post-conventional Morality.” A line connects this box with another box to the right containing “Stage 5, Social contract: behavior driven by balance of social order and individual rights.” To the right is another box connected by a line containing “Stage 6, Universal ethics: behavior driven by internal moral principles.”
Kohlberg 
identified 
three levels 
of moral 
reasoning: 
pre-conventional, 
conventional, and 
post-conventional: Each 
level is 
associated 
with 
increasingly 
complex 
stages of 
moral 
development. 
(Figure 3). 

It is important to realize that even those people who have the 
most sophisticated, post-conventional reasons for some choices 
may make other choices for the simplest of pre-conventional 
reasons. Many psychologists agree with Kohlberg’s theory of moral 


development but point out that moral reasoning is very different 
from moral behavior. Sometimes what we say we would do in a 
situation is not what we actually do in that situation. In other words, 
we might “talk the talk,” but not “walk the walk.” 

How does this theory apply to males and females? Kohlberg (1969) 
felt that more males than females move past stage four in their 
moral development. He went on to note that women seem to be 
deficient in their moral reasoning abilities. These ideas were not 
well received by Carol Gilligan, a research assistant of Kohlberg, 
who consequently developed her own ideas of moral development. 
In her groundbreaking book, 
In a Different Voice: Psychological 
Theory and Women’s Development, Gilligan (1982) criticized her 
former mentor’s theory because it was based only on upper-class 
White men and boys. She argued that women are not deficient in 
their moral reasoning—she proposed that males and females reason 
differently. Girls and women focus more on staying connected and 
the importance of interpersonal relationships. Therefore, in the 
Heinz dilemma, many girls and women respond that Heinz should 
not steal the medicine. Their reasoning is that if he steals the 
medicine, is arrested, and is put in jail, then he and his wife will be 
separated, and she could die while he is still in prison. 

Additional Resources 

This brief video demonstrates different children’s ability to 
understand object permanence according to Jean Piaget’s Stages of 
Cognitive Development in stage one: sensorimotor stage. 


Thumbnail for the embedded element "Piaget - Stage 1 - Sensorimotor stage : Object Permanence"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=111 

This video shows a 4.5-year-old boy in the preoperational stage as 
he responds to Piaget’s conservation tasks in the Stages of Cognitive 
Development. 

 



Thumbnail for the embedded element "A typical child on Piaget's conservation tasks"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=111 

Piaget developed the Three-Mountain Task to determine the level of 
egocentrism displayed by children. Children view a 3-dimensional 
mountain scene from one viewpoint and are asked what another 
person at a different viewpoint would see in the same scene. 
Watch 
the Three-Mountain Task in action in this short video from the 
University of Minnesota and the Science Museum of Minnesota 
which represents Piaget’s preoperational stage. 

 



Thumbnail for the embedded element "Piaget's Mountains Task"
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the 
text. You can view it online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/
hbse1/?p=111 

End-of-Chapter Summary 

There are many theories regarding how babies and children grow 
and develop into happy, healthy adults. Sigmund Freud suggested 
that we pass through a series of psychosexual stages in which our 
energy is focused on certain erogenous zones on the body. Eric 
Erikson modified Freud’s ideas and suggested a theory of 
psychosocial development. Erikson said that our social interactions 
and successful completion of social tasks shape our sense of self. 
Jean Piaget proposed a theory of cognitive development that 
explains how children think and reason as they move through 
various stages. Finally, Lawrence Kohlberg turned his attention to 


moral development. He said that we pass through three levels of 
moral thinking that build on our cognitive development. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 9.2: 
Lifespan Theories 
in 
OpenStax, 
Psychology. OpenStax CNX. 
Oct 2, 2019 
http://cnx.org/contents/
4abf04bf-93a0-45c3-9cbc-2cefd46e68cc@12.2. 
Download for free 
athttp://cnx.org/contents/
4abf04bf-93a0-45c3-9cbc-2cefd46e68cc@12.2. 


PART 
III 
THE SOCIOCULTURAL 
DIMENSION 

Learning Objectives: 

Describe Critical Practice Theory 
Describe Feminist Theory 
Describe the Sociocultural Perspective 
Define Cultural Concepts in Social Work 



Vignette 

James
Photo by Jennifer Marquez on 
Unsplash 

James is a 16 y/o Latino 
American whose parents 
migrated to the United States 
from Guatemala before he was 
born. His family has always 
valued the traditional customs of 
their culture, his father being the 
head of the house and his mother 
staying home to run the 
household and raise the 
children. They have often 
discussed plans for an arranged 
marriage with a girl back in 
Guatemala throughout his life, 
but he had never really given it 
much thought until recently 
when his mother mentioned they 
would begin plans for his 
wedding within the next year. James is struggling with the thought of 
an arranged marriage as he has grown up in the United States where 
this is not a tradition that is practiced. On top of this, his father has 
recently lost his job and his mother has been struggling with some 
health issues. His family is experiencing increased stressors as his 
father is struggling to find a new job and his mother is unable to afford 
healthcare until his father begins working again. He has begun to 
demonstrate struggles at school due to the stress and anxiety he is 
experiencing with plans of his arranged marriage as well as increased 
financial struggles his family is experiencing. He has been reported to 
be getting into fights with peers, talking back to teachers, and refusing 
to turn in his work. James has been referred to the school social worker 
regarding his academic problems and his parents have encouraged 
him to meet with the priest at their church. 




The Sociocultural Dimension 

This dimension will continue introductions of theories and 
perspectives and exploration of how our environment teaches, 
influences, and changes (or reinforces) our behaviors and 
responses. 

Critical Practice Theory states social problems are caused by an 
oppressive society and maintained by dominate groups. It is similar 
to Conflict Theory but expands further past the focus of unequal 
power distribution to explore social change views within social work 
practice. The goal is to help clients overcome limits of existing social 
order through empowerment. 

Feminist Theory is based on the advocacy of social, economic, 
and political equality between both sexes and is often expanded to 
apply equal rights to all minority groups. 

James’ story – Within Critical Practice theory, we 
would examine dominant groups he is connected with 
and explore any oppression he or his family may be 
experiencing that are causing increased struggles with 
his father’s attempts to find a job, access to healthcare, 
academic supports, or basic needs. We want to explore 
how he is impacted by dominant groups and work to 
support him in connecting to his experiences, recognizing 
how he is being impacted, and empowering him in his 
work to make change at all levels (micro, mezzo, and 
macro). Feminist theory joins in with work in advocating 
for equality in all areas of his life. 


Sociocultural Perspective states that much of your behavior and 
feelings are dictated by the culture you live in. Think about how your 
culture greets one another – can you think of a way another culture 
might do this differently? Does your culture value the individual or 
the group? 

When working with James it will also be important to 
consider the cultural aspects he is connected to and how 
this may be impacting his life. He reports feeling part of 
both Guatemalan and American cultures but feels some 
conflict as his parents stay strongly connected to their 
culture with minimal thoughts of incorporating American 
culture into their home and expectations of behaviors. 
What struggles might this conflict cause? How would 
having an understanding of his family’s culture help you 
in providing supports for James? 


Cultural Concepts in Social Work: 

Cultural relativism – the idea that different cultures 
should be treated equally and not judged against the 
criteria of another. 

Ethnic identity – how people form their identity/
sense of belonging in relation to their ancestry and 
cultural heritage. 

Ethnicity – how people associate themselves with a 
group that has a common national or cultural tradition. 

Ethnocentrism – belief that one’s ethnic group or 


culture is superior to another and is the standard of how 
other cultures should be evaluated. 

Ethos – the set of beliefs, morals, ethics, and values a 
person or community lives by. 

Ideology – a person’s principal ideas of what is correct 
and the way things should be. 

Social class – a division of a society based on social 
and economic status. 

Worldview – a particular philosophy of life or 
conception of the world – how you look at the world or 
your personal philosophy. 

Please continue to Chapter 4: Theoretical Perspectives which will 
cover Conflict Theory, Functionalism, and Symbolic Interactionist 
Theory (also known as Social Constructionism Theory). I would 
encourage you to continue thinking about how each of these 
theories connects to James’ story. And Chapter 5: The Elements of 
Culture for further exploration of cultural competence. 

Key Takeaways: 

Conflict Theory attempts to understand 
behaviors through exploration of conflicts/
tensions. 



Critical Practice Theory states social problems 
are caused by an oppressive society and 
maintained by dominate groups. 
Functionalist Theory sees society as a complex 
system whose parts work together to promote 
solidarity and stability. 
Social Constructionism or Symbolic Interaction 
Theory states people attach meaning to 
communications and interactions they have with 
their environments. This is experienced differently 
for each individual and they create their reality 
based on their experiences. 
Feminist Theory is based on the advocacy of 
social, economic, and political equality between 
both sexes and is often expanded to apply equal 
rights to all minority groups. 
Culture can be defined as the customs, arts, 
social institutions, and achievements of a 
particular nation, people, or other social group. 
We also explored cultural concepts in Social 
Work. 


References 

Rogers, A. (2013). 
Human behavior in the social environment (Fourth 
Edition.) New York: Routledge. 


Chapter 3: Theoretical 
Perspectives 

Chapter 3 Learning Objectives 

Explain what sociological theories are and how 
they are used. 
Understand the similarities and differences 
between structural functionalism, conflict theory, 
and symbolic interactionism. 



People holding posters and waving flags at a protest rally outside the U.S. Capitol Building are shown.
Sociologists develop theories to explain social occurrences such as protest 
rallies. (Photo courtesy of voanews.com/Wikimedia Commons) 

Sociologists study social events, interactions, and patterns, and they 
develop a theory in an attempt to explain why things work as they 
do. In sociology, a 
theory is a way to explain different aspects of 
social interactions and to create a testable proposition, called a 
hypothesis, 
about society (Allan 2006). 

For example, although suicide is generally considered an 
individual phenomenon, Émile Durkheim was interested in studying 
the social factors that affect it. He studied social ties within a group, 
or social solidarity, and hypothesized that differences in suicide 
rates might be explained by religion-based differences. Durkheim 
gathered a large amount of data about Europeans who had ended 
their lives, and he did indeed find differences based on religion. 
Protestants were more likely to commit suicide than Catholics in 
Durkheim’s society, and his work supports the utility of theory in 
sociological research. 


Theories vary in scope depending on the scale of the issues that 
they are meant to explain. Macro-level theories relate to large-scale 
issues and large groups of people, while micro-level theories look 
at very specific relationships between individuals or small groups. 
Grand theories attempt to explain large-scale relationships and 
answer fundamental questions such as why societies form and why 
they change. Sociological theory is constantly evolving and should 
never be considered complete. Classic sociological theories are still 
considered important and current, but new sociological theories 
build upon the work of their predecessors and add to them (Calhoun 
2002). 

In sociology, a few theories provide broad perspectives that help 
explain many different aspects of social life, and these are called 
paradigms. Paradigms are philosophical and theoretical frameworks 
used within a discipline to formulate theories, generalizations, and 
the experiments performed in support of them. Three paradigms 
have come to dominate sociological thinking because they provide 
useful explanations: structural functionalism, conflict theory, and 
symbolic interactionism. 

Sociological Theories or Perspectives Different sociological perspectives 
enable sociologists to view social issues through a variety of useful 
lenses. 

Sociological 
Paradigm 
Level of 
Analysis Focus 
Structural 
Functionalism 
Macro 
or mid 
The way each part of society functions 
together to contribute to the whole 
Conflict 
Theory Macro 
The way inequalities contribute to social 
differences and perpetuate differences in 
power 
Symbolic 
Interactionism Micro One-to-one interactions and 
communications 


Functionalism 

Functionalism also called structural-functional theory, sees society 
as a structure with interrelated parts designed to meet the 
biological and social needs of the individuals in that society. 
Functionalism grew out of the writings of English philosopher and 
biologist, Hebert Spencer (1820–1903), who saw similarities between 
society and the human body; he argued that just as the various 
organs of the bodywork together to keep the body functioning, the 
various parts of society work together to keep society functioning 
(Spencer 1898). The parts of society that Spencer referred to were 
the social 
institutions, 
or patterns of beliefs and behaviors focused 
on meeting social needs, such as government, education, family, 
healthcare, religion, and the economy. 

Émile Durkheim, another early sociologist, applied Spencer’s 
theory to explain how societies change and survive over time. 
Durkheim believed that society is a complex system of interrelated 
and interdependent parts that work together to maintain stability 
(Durkheim 1893), and that society is held together by shared values, 
languages, and symbols. He believed that to study society, a 
sociologist must look beyond individuals to social facts such as laws, 
morals, values, religious beliefs, customs, fashion, and rituals, which 
all serve to govern social life. Alfred Radcliff-Brown (1881–1955) 
defined the 
function of any recurrent activity as the part it played 
in social life as a whole, and therefore the contribution it makes 
to social stability and continuity (Radcliff-Brown 1952). In a healthy 
society, all parts work together to maintain stability, a state called 
dynamic 
equilibrium 
by later sociologists such as Parsons (1961). 

Durkheim believed that individuals may make up society, but in 
order to study society, sociologists have to look beyond individuals 
to social facts. Social facts are the laws, morals, values, religious 
beliefs, customs, fashions, rituals, and all of the cultural rules that 
govern social life (Durkheim 1895). Each of these social facts serves 
one or more functions within a society. For example, one function 


of a society’s laws may be to protect society from violence, while 
another is to punish criminal behavior, while another is to preserve 
public health. 

Another noted structural-functionalist, Robert Merton 
(1910–2003), pointed out that social processes often have many 
functions. Manifest functions are the consequences of a social 
process that are sought or anticipated, while latent 
functions are 
the unsought consequences of a social process. A manifest function 
of college education, for example, includes gaining knowledge, 
preparing for a career, and finding a good job that utilizes that 
education. The latent functions of your college years include 
meeting new people, participating in extracurricular activities, or 
even finding a spouse or partner. Another latent function of 
education is creating a hierarchy of employment based on the level 
of education attained. Latent functions can be beneficial, neutral, 
or harmful. Social processes that have undesirable consequences 
for the operation of society are called dysfunctions. In education, 
examples of dysfunction include getting bad grades, truancy, 
dropping out, not graduating, and not finding suitable employment. 

Criticism 

One criticism of the structural-functional theory is that it can’t 
adequately explain social change. Also problematic is the somewhat 
circular nature of this theory; repetitive behavior patterns are 
assumed to have a function, yet we profess to know that they have a 
function only because they are repeated. Furthermore, dysfunctions 
may continue, even though they don’t serve a function, which 
seemingly contradicts the basic premise of the theory. Many 
sociologists now believe that functionalism is no longer useful as a 
macro-level theory, but that it does serve a useful purpose in some 
mid-level analyses. 


Global Culture? 

A person is shown from above holding a laptop.
Some sociologists see the online world contributing to the creation of an 
emerging global culture. Are you a part of any global communities? (Photo 
courtesy of quasireversible/flickr) 


Sociologists around the world look closely for signs of what would 
be an unprecedented event: the emergence of a global culture. In 
the past, empires such as those that existed in China, Europe, Africa, 
and Central and South America linked people from many different 
countries, but those people rarely became part of a common 
culture. They lived too far from each other, spoke different 
languages, practiced different religions, and traded few goods. 
Today, increases in communication, travel, and trade have made 
the world a much smaller place. More and more people are able 
to communicate with each other instantly—wherever they are 
located—by telephone, video, and text. They share movies, television 
shows, music, games, and information over the Internet. Students 
can study with teachers and pupils from the other side of the globe. 
Governments find it harder to hide conditions inside their countries 
from the rest of the world. 

Sociologists research many different aspects of this potential 
global culture. Some explore the dynamics involved in the social 
interactions of global online communities, such as when members 
feel a closer kinship to other group members than to people residing 
in their own countries. Other sociologists study the impact this 
growing international culture has on smaller, less-powerful local 
cultures. Yet other researchers explore how international markets 
and the outsourcing of labor impact social inequalities. Sociology 
can play a key role in people’s abilities to understand the nature of 
this emerging global culture and how to respond to it. 

Conflict Theory 

Conflict theory looks at society as a competition for limited 
resources. This perspective is a macro-level approach most 
identified with the writings of German philosopher and sociologist 
Karl Marx (1818–1883), who saw society as being made up of 
individuals in different social classes who must compete for social, 


material, and political resources such as food and housing, 
employment, education, and leisure time. Social institutions like 
government, education, and religion reflect this competition in 
their inherent inequalities and help maintain the unequal social 
structure. Some individuals and organizations are able to obtain and 
keep more resources than others, and these “winners” use their 
power and influence to maintain social institutions. Several theorist 
suggested variations on this basic theme. 

Polish-Austrian sociologist Ludwig Gumplowicz (1838–1909) 
expanded on Marx’s ideas by arguing that war and conquest are the 
basis of civilizations. He believed that cultural and ethnic conflicts 
led to states being identified and defined by a dominant group that 
had power over other groups (Irving 2007). 

German sociologist Max Weber agreed with Marx but also 
believed that, in addition to economic inequalities, inequalities of 
political power and social structure cause conflict. Weber noted 
that different groups were affected differently based on education, 
race, and gender, and that people’s reactions to inequality were 
moderated by class differences and rates of social mobility, as well 
as by perceptions about the legitimacy of those in power. 

German sociologist Georg Simmel (1858–1918) believed that 
conflict can help integrate and stabilize a society. He said that the 
intensity of the conflict varies depending on the emotional 
involvement of the parties, the degree of solidarity within the 
opposing groups, and the clarity and limited nature of the goals. 
Simmel also showed that groups work to create internal solidarity, 
centralize power, and reduce dissent. Resolving conflicts can reduce 
tension and hostility and can pave the way for future agreements. 

In the 1930s and 1940s, German philosophers, known as the 
Frankfurt School, developed critical theory as an elaboration on 
Marxist principles. Critical theory is an expansion of conflict theory 
and is broader than just sociology, including other social sciences 
and philosophy. A critical theory attempts to address structural 
issues causing inequality; it must explain what’s wrong in current 


social reality, identify the people who can make changes, and 
provide practical goals for social transformation (Horkeimer 1982). 

More recently, inequality based on gender or race has been 
explained in a similar manner and has identified institutionalized 
power structures that help to maintain inequality between groups. 
Janet Saltzman Chafetz (1941–2006) presented a model of feminist 
theory that attempts to explain the forces that maintain gender 
inequality as well as a theory of how such a system can be changed 
(Turner 2003). Similarly, critical race theory grew out of a critical 
analysis of race and racism from a legal point of view. Critical race 
theory looks at structural inequality based on white privilege and 
associated wealth, power, and prestige. 

Criticism 

Farming and Locavores: How Sociological 
Perspectives Might View Food Consumption 

The consumption of food is a commonplace, daily occurrence, yet it 
can also be associated with important moments in our lives. Eating 
can be an individual or a group action, and eating habits and 
customs are influenced by our cultures. In the context of society, 
our nation’s food system is at the core of numerous social 
movements, political issues, and economic debates. Any of these 
factors might become a topic of sociological study. 

A structural-functional approach to the topic of food 
consumption might be interested in the role of the agriculture 
industry within the nation’s economy and how this has changed 
from the early days of manual-labor farming to modern mechanized 
production. Another examination might study the different 
functions that occur in food production: from farming and 
harvesting to flashy packaging and mass consumerism. 


A conflict theorist might be interested in the power differentials 
present in the regulation of food, by exploring where people’s right 
to information intersects with corporations’ drive for profit and 
how the government mediates those interests. Or a conflict theorist 
might be interested in the power and powerlessness experienced 
by local farmers versus large farming conglomerates, such as the 
documentary 
Food Inc. 
depicts as resulting from Monsanto’s 
patenting of seed technology. Another topic of study might be how 
nutrition varies between different social classes. 

A sociologist viewing food consumption through a symbolic 
interactionist lens would be more interested in micro-level topics, 
such as the symbolic use of food in religious rituals, or the role it 
plays in the social interaction of a family dinner. This perspective 
might also study the interactions among group members who 
identify themselves based on their sharing a particular diet, such as 
vegetarians (people who don’t eat meat) or locavores (people who 
strive to eat locally produced food). 

Just as structural functionalism was criticized for focusing too 
much on the stability of societies, conflict theory has been criticized 
because it tends to focus on conflict to the exclusion of recognizing 
stability. Many social structures are extremely stable or have 
gradually progressed over time rather than changing abruptly as 
conflict theory would suggest. 

Symbolic Interactionist Theory 

Symbolic interactionism is a micro-level theory that focuses on 
the relationships among individuals within a society. 
Communication—the exchange of meaning through language and 
symbols—is believed to be the way in which people make sense of 
their social worlds. Theorists Herman and Reynolds (1994) note that 
this perspective sees people as being active in shaping the social 
world rather than simply being acted upon. 


George Herbert Mead (1863–1931) is considered a founder of 
symbolic interactionism though he never published his work on it 
(LaRossa and Reitzes 1993). Mead’s student, Herbert Blumer, coined 
the term “symbolic interactionism” and outlined these basic 
premises: humans interact with things based on meanings ascribed 
to those things; the ascribed meaning of things comes from our 
interactions with others and society; the meanings of things are 
interpreted by a person when dealing with things in specific 
circumstances (Blumer 1969). If you love books, for example, a 
symbolic interactionist might propose that you learned that books 
are good or important in the interactions you had with family, 
friends, school, or church; maybe your family had a special reading 
time each week, getting your library card was treated as a special 
event, or bedtime stories were associated with warmth and comfort. 

Social scientists who apply symbolic-interactionist thinking look 
for patterns of interaction between individuals. Their studies often 
involve observation of one-on-one interactions. For example, while 
a conflict theorist studying a political protest might focus on class 
difference, a symbolic interactionist would be more interested in 
how individuals in the protesting group interact, as well as the 
signs and symbols protesters use to communicate their message. 
The focus on the importance of symbols in building a society led 
sociologists like Erving Goffman (1922–1982) to develop a technique 
called 
dramaturgical analysis. Goffman used theater as an analogy 
for social interaction and recognized that people’s interactions 
showed patterns of cultural “scripts.” Because it can be unclear 
what part a person may play in a given situation, he or she has to 
improvise his or her role as the situation unfolds (Goffman 1958). 

Studies that use the symbolic interactionist perspective are more 
likely to use qualitative research methods, such as in-depth 
interviews or participant observation, because they seek to 
understand the symbolic worlds in which research subjects live. 

Constructivism is an extension of symbolic interaction theory 
which proposes that reality is what humans cognitively construct 
it to be. We develop social constructs based on interactions with 


others, and those constructs that last over time are those that have 
meanings which are widely agreed-upon or generally accepted by 
most within the society. This approach is often used to understand 
what’s defined as deviant within a society. There is no absolute 
definition of deviance, and different societies have constructed 
different meanings for deviance, as well as associating different 
behaviors with deviance. One situation that illustrates this is what 
you believe you’re to do if you find a wallet in the street. In the 
United States, turning the wallet in to local authorities would be 
considered the appropriate action, and to keep the wallet would be 
seen as deviant. In contrast, many Eastern societies would consider 
it much more appropriate to keep the wallet and search for the 
owner yourself; turning it over to someone else, even the 
authorities, would be considered deviant behavior. 

Criticism 

Research done from this perspective is often scrutinized because of 
the difficulty of remaining objective. Others criticize the extremely 
narrow focus on symbolic interaction. Proponents, of course, 
consider this one of its greatest strengths. 

Sociological Theory Today 

These three approaches are still the main foundation of modern 
sociological theory, but some evolution has been seen. Structural-
functionalism was a dominant force after World War II and until 
the 1960s and 1970s. At that time, sociologists began to feel that 
structural-functionalism did not sufficiently explain the rapid social 
changes happening in the United States at that time. 

Conflict theory then gained prominence, as there was a renewed 


emphasis on institutionalized social inequality. Critical theory, and 
the particular aspects of feminist theory and critical race theory, 
focused on creating social change through the application of 
sociological principles, and the field saw a renewed emphasis on 
helping ordinary people understand sociology principles, in the 
form of public sociology. 

The postmodern social theory attempts to look at society through 
an entirely new lens by rejecting previous macro-level attempts 
to explain social phenomena. Generally considered as gaining 
acceptance in the late 1970s and early 1980s, postmodern social 
theory is a micro-level approach that looks at small, local groups 
and individual reality. Its growth in popularity coincides with the 
constructivist aspects of symbolic interactionism. 

End-of-Chapter Summary 

Sociologists develop theories to explain social events, interactions, 
and patterns. A theory is a proposed explanation of those social 
interactions. Theories have different scales. Macro-level theories, 
such as structural functionalism and conflict theory, attempt to 
explain how societies operate as a whole. Micro-level theories, such 
as symbolic interactionism, focus on interactions between 
individuals. 

References 

Allan, Kenneth. 2006. 
Contemporary Social and Sociological Theory: 
Visualizing Social Worlds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press. 

Blumer, H. 1969. 
Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 


Broce, Gerald. 1973. 
History of Anthropology. Minneapolis: Burgess 
Publishing Company. 

Calhoun, Craig J. 2002. 
Classical Sociological Theory. Malden, MA: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 

Durkheim, Émile. 1984 [1893]. 
The Division of Labor in Society. New 
York: Free Press. 

Durkheim, Émile. 1964 [1895]. 
The Rules of Sociological Method, 
edited by J. Mueller, E. George and E. Caitlin. 8th ed. Translated by 
S. Solovay. New York: Free Press. 

Goffman, Erving. 1958. 
The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. 
Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh, Social Sciences Research 
Centre. 

Goldschmidt, Walter. 1996. “Functionalism” in 
Encyclopedia of 
Cultural Anthropology, Vol. 2, edited by D. Levinson and M. Ember. 
New York: Henry Holt and Company. 

Henry, Stuart. 2007. “Deviance, Constructionist 
Perspectives.” 
Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology. Retrieved 
October 14, 2014 (http://www.sociologyencyclopedia.com/
public/
tocnode?id=g9781405124331_yr2011_chunk_g978140512433110_ss1-41). 

Herman, Nancy J., and Larry T. Reynolds. 1994. 
Symbolic Interaction: 
An Introduction to Social Psychology. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press. 

Horkeimer, M. 1982. 
Critical Theory. New York: Seabury Press. 

Irving, John Scott. 2007. 
Fifty Key Sociologists: The Formative 
Theorists. New York: Routledge. 

LaRossa, R., and D.C. Reitzes. 1993. “Symbolic Interactionism and 
Family Studies.” Pp. 135–163 in 
Sourcebook of Family Theories and 
Methods: A Contextual Approach, edited by P. G. Boss, W. J. 
Doherty, R. LaRossa, W. R. Schumm, and S. K. Steinmetz. New 
York: Springer. 

Maryanski, Alexandra, and Jonathan Turner. 1992. 
The Social Cage: 
Human Nature and the Evolution of Society. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press. 


Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels. 1998 [1848]. 
The Communist 
Manifesto. New York: Penguin. 

Parsons, T. 1961. 
Theories of Society: Foundations of Modern 
Sociological Theory. New York: Free Press. 

Pew Research Center. 2012. “Mobile Technology Fact Sheet.” 
Pew 
Research Internet Project, April 2012. Retrieved October 15, 2014 
(http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/mobile-technology-
fact-sheet/). 

Radcliffe-Brown, A.R. 1952. 
Structure and Function in Primitive 
Society: Essays and Addresses. London: Cohen and West. 

Spencer, Herbert. 1898. 
The Principles of Biology. New York: D. 
Appleton and Company. 

Turner, J. 2003. 
The Structure of Sociological Theory. 
7th 
ed. Belmont, 
CA: Thompson/Wadsworth. 

UCLA School of Public Affairs. n.d. “What is Critical Race 
Theory?” 
UCLA School of Public Affairs: Critical Race Studies. 
Retrieved October 20, 2014 (http://spacrs.wordpress.com/what-
is-critical-race-theory/). 

Attribution 

Adapted from Theoretical Perspectives by Rice University under the 
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 license. 


Chapter 4: The Elements of 
Culture 

Chapter 4 Learning Objectives 

Distinguish material culture and nonmaterial 
culture. 
List and define the several elements of culture. 
Describe certain values that distinguish the United 
States from other nations. 


Culture is as the symbols, language, beliefs, values, and artifacts 
that are part of any society. As this definition suggests, there are 
two basic components of culture: ideas and symbols on the one 
hand and artifacts (material objects) on the other. The first type, 
called nonmaterial culture, includes the values, beliefs, symbols, 
and language that define a society. The second type, called 
material 
culture, includes all the society’s physical objects, such as its tools 
and technology, clothing, eating utensils, and means of 
transportation. These elements of culture are discussed next. 


Symbols 

Every culture is filled with 
symbols, or things that stand for 
something else and that often evoke various reactions and 
emotions. Some symbols are actually types of nonverbal 
communication, while other symbols are in fact material objects. 
As the symbolic interactionist perspective discussed in 
Chapter 1 
“Sociology and the Sociological Perspective” 
emphasizes, shared 
symbols make social interaction possible. 

Let’s look at nonverbal symbols first. A common one is shaking 
hands, which is done in some societies but not in others. It 
commonly conveys friendship and is used as a sign of both greeting 
and departure. Probably all societies have nonverbal symbols we 
call 
gestures, movements of the hands, arms, or other parts of the 
body that are meant to convey certain ideas or emotions. However, 
the same gesture can mean one thing in one society and something 
quite different in another society (Axtell, 1998). In the United States, 
for example, if we nod our head up and down, we mean yes, and 
if we shake it back and forth, we mean no. In Bulgaria, however, 
nodding means no, while shaking our head back and forth means 
yes! In the United States, if we make an “O” by putting our thumb 
and forefinger together, we mean “OK,” but the same gesture in 
certain parts of Europe signifies an obscenity. “Thumbs up” in the 
United States means “great” or “wonderful,” but in Australia it means 
the same thing as extending the middle finger in the United States. 
Certain parts of the Middle East and Asia would be offended if they 
saw you using your left hand to eat, because they use their left hand 
for bathroom hygiene. 


The
The meaning of a gesture may differ from one society to another. This familiar 
gesture means “OK” in the United States, but in certain parts of Europe it 
signifies an obscenity. An American using this gesture might very well be 
greeted with an angry look. d Wang – 
ok 
– CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. 

Some of our most important symbols are objects. Here the U.S. flag 
is a prime example. For most Americans, the flag is not just a piece 
of cloth with red and white stripes and white stars against a field 
of blue. Instead, it is a symbol of freedom, democracy, and other 
American values and, accordingly, inspires pride and patriotism. 
During the Vietnam War, however, the flag became to many 
Americans a symbol of war and imperialism. Some burned the flag 
in protest, prompting angry attacks by bystanders and negative 
coverage by the news media. 

Other objects have symbolic value for religious reasons. Three of 
the most familiar religious symbols in many nations are the cross, 
the Star of David, and the crescent moon, which are widely 
understood to represent Christianity, Judaism, and Islam, 
respectively. Whereas many cultures attach no religious 
significance to these shapes, for many people across the world they 


evoke very strong feelings of religious faith. Recognizing this, hate 
groups have often desecrated these symbols. 

As these examples indicate, shared symbols, both nonverbal 
communication and tangible objects, are an important part of any 
culture but also can lead to misunderstandings and even hostility. 
These problems underscore the significance of symbols for social 
interaction and meaning. 

Language 

Perhaps our most important set of symbols is language. In English, 
the word 
chair 
means something we sit on. In Spanish, the 
word 
silla 
means the same thing. As long as we agree how to 
interpret these words, a shared language and thus society are 
possible. By the same token, differences in languages can make it 
quite difficult to communicate. For example, imagine you are in 
a foreign country where you do not know the language and the 
country’s citizens do not know yours. Worse yet, you forgot to bring 
your dictionary that translates their language into yours, and vice 
versa, and your iPhone battery has died. You become lost. How will 
you get help? What will you do? Is there any way to communicate 
your plight? 

As this scenario suggests, language is crucial to communication 
and thus to any society’s culture. Children learn language from their 
culture just as they learn about shaking hands, about gestures, and 
about the significance of the flag and other symbols. Humans have 
a capacity for language that no other animal species possesses. 
Our capacity for language in turn helps make our complex culture 
possible. 


Three kids talking on the street and smiling
Language is a key symbol of any culture. Humans have a capacity for 
language that no other animal species has, and children learn the language of 
their society just as they learn other aspects of their culture. Bill Benzon – 
IMGP3639 – talk – CC BY-SA 2.0. 

In the United States, some people consider a common language so 
important that they advocate making English the official language 
of certain cities or states or even the whole country and banning 
bilingual education in the public schools (Ray, 2007). Critics 
acknowledge the importance of English but allege that this 
movement smacks of anti-immigrant prejudice and would help 
destroy ethnic subcultures. In 2009, voters in Nashville, Tennessee, 
rejected a proposal that would have made English the city’s official 
language and required all city workers to speak in English rather 
than their native language (R. Brown, 2009). 

Language, of course, can be spoken or written. One of the most 
important developments in the evolution of society was the creation 
of written language. Some of the preindustrial societies that 
anthropologists have studied have written language, while others do 
not, and in the remaining societies the “written” language consists 


societies around the world (Murdock & White, 1969). In, we 
mainly of pictures, not words. 
Figure 3.1 “The Presence of Written 
Language (Percentage of Societies)” 
illustrates this variation with 
data from 186 preindustrial societies called the Standard Cross-
Cultural Sample (SCCS), a famous data set compiled several decades 
ago by anthropologist George Murdock and colleagues from 
information that had been gathered on hundreds of preindustrial 
Figure 3.1 
“The Presence of Written Language (Percentage of Societies)”
see that only about one-fourth of the SCCS societies have a written 
language, while about equal proportions have no language at all or 
only pictures. 

Figure 3.1 
The Presence of Written Language (Percentage of 
Societies) 

The Presence of Written Language (Percentage of Societies): 39.2% no writing, 37.1% pictures only, 23.7% writing
Source: Data 
from 
Standard 
Cross-Cultural Sample. 

To what extent does language influence how we think and how 
we perceive the social and physical worlds? The famous but 
controversial 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, named after two linguistic 
anthropologists, Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf, argues that 



people cannot easily understand concepts and objects unless their 
language contains words for these items (Whorf, 1956). Language 
thus influences how we understand the world around us. For 
example, people in a country such as the United States that has 
many terms for different types of kisses (e.g. buss, peck, smack, 
smooch, and soul) are better able to appreciate these different types 
than people in a country such as Japan, which, as we saw earlier, 
only fairly recently developed the word 
kissu 
for kiss. 

Another illustration of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis is seen in 
sexist language, in which the use of male nouns and pronouns 
shapes how we think about the world (Miles, 2008). In older 
children’s books, words like fireman 
and mailman 
are common, 
along with pictures of men in these jobs, and critics say they send 
a message to children that these are male jobs, not female jobs. 
If a teacher tells a second-grade class, “Every student should put 
his books under his desk,” the teacher obviously means students of 
both sexes but may be sending a subtle message that boys matter 
more than girls. For these reasons, several guidebooks promote 
the use of nonsexist language (Maggio, 1998). 
Table 3.1 “Examples 
of Sexist Terms and Nonsexist Alternatives” 
provides examples of 
sexist language and nonsexist alternatives. 

Table 3.1 
Examples of Sexist Terms and Nonsexist Alternatives 


Term Alternative 
Businessman Businessperson, executive 
Fireman Fire fighter 
Chairman Chair, chairperson 
Policeman Police officer 
Mailman Letter carrier, postal worker 
Mankind Humankind, people 
Man-made Artificial, synthetic 
Waitress Server 
He (as generic pronoun) He or she; he/she; s/he 
“A professor should be devoted to 
his students” 
“Professors should be devoted to 
their students” 

The use of racist language also illustrates the Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis. An old saying goes, “Sticks and stones may break my 
bones, but names will never hurt me.” That may be true in theory 
but not in reality. Names can hurt, especially names that are racial 
slurs, which African Americans growing up before the era of the civil 
rights movement routinely heard. According to the Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis, the use of these words would have affected how whites 
perceived African Americans. More generally, the use of racist terms 
may reinforce racial prejudice and racial stereotypes. 

Sociology Making a Difference 

Overcoming Cultural and Ethnic Differences 

People from many different racial and ethnic 
backgrounds live in large countries such as the United 
States. Because of cultural differences and various 


prejudices, it can be difficult for individuals from one 
background to interact with individuals from another 
background. Fortunately, a line of research, grounded 
in 
contact theory 
and conducted by sociologists and social 
psychologists, suggests that interaction among individuals 
from different backgrounds can indeed help overcome 
tensions arising from their different cultures and any 
prejudices they may hold. This happens because such 
contact helps disconfirm stereotypes that people may hold 
of those from different backgrounds (Dixon, 2006; 
Pettigrew & Tropp, 2005). 

Recent studies of college students provide additional 
evidence that social contact can help overcome cultural 
differences and prejudices. Because many students are 
randomly assigned to their roommates when they enter 
college, interracial roommates provide a “natural” 
experiment for studying the effects of social interaction on 
racial prejudice. Studies of such roommates find that 
whites with black roommates report lowered racial 
prejudice and greater numbers of interracial friendships 
with other students (Laar, Levin, Sinclair, & Sidanius, 2005; 
Shook & Fazio, 2008). 

It is not easy to overcome cultural differences and 
prejudices, and studies also find that interracial college 
roommates often have to face many difficulties in 
overcoming the cultural differences and prejudices that 
existed before they started living together (Shook & Fazio, 
2008). Yet the body of work supporting contact theory 
suggests that efforts that increase social interaction among 
people from different cultural and ethnic backgrounds in 
the long run will reduce racial and ethnic tensions. 


Norms 

Cultures differ widely in their 
norms, or standards and expectations 
for behaving. We already saw that the nature of drunken behavior 
depends on society’s expectations of how people should behave 
when drunk. Norms of drunken behavior influence how we behave 
when we drink too much. 

Norms are often divided into two types, 
formal 
norms 
and 
informal norms. Formal norms, also 
called 
mores 
(MOOR-ayz) and 
laws, refer to the standards of 
behavior considered the most important in any society. Examples 
in the United States include traffic laws, criminal codes, and, in 
a college context, student behavior codes addressing such things 
as cheating and hate speech. Informal norms, also 
called 
folkways 
and 
customs, refer to standards of behavior that are 
considered less important but still influence how we behave. Table 
manners are a common example of informal norms, as are such 
everyday behaviors as how we interact with a cashier and how we 
ride in an elevator. 

Many norms differ dramatically from one culture to the next. 
Some of the best evidence for cultural variation in norms comes 
from the study of sexual behavior (Edgerton, 1976). Among the Pokot 
of East Africa, for example, women are expected to enjoy sex, while 
among the Gusii a few hundred miles away, women who enjoy sex 
are considered deviant. In Inis Beag, a small island off the coast of 
Ireland, sex is considered embarrassing and even disgusting; men 
feel that intercourse drains their strength, while women consider 
it a burden. Even nudity is considered terrible, and people on Inis 
Beag keep their clothes on while they bathe. The situation is quite 
different in Mangaia, a small island in the South Pacific. Here sex is 
considered very enjoyable, and it is the major subject of songs and 
stories. 

While many societies frown on homosexuality, others accept it. 
Among the Azande of East Africa, for example, young warriors live 


with each other and are not allowed to marry. During this time, 
they often have sex with younger boys, and this homosexuality 
is approved by their culture. Among the Sambia of New Guinea, 
young males live separately from females and engage in homosexual 
behavior for at least a decade. It is felt that the boys would be less 
masculine if they continued to live with their mothers and that the 
semen of older males helps young boys become strong and fierce 
(Edgerton, 1976). 

A gay couple kissing at a Lesbian and Gay parade
Although many societies disapprove of homosexuality, other societies accept 
it. This difference illustrates the importance of culture for people’s attitudes. 
philippe leroyer – 
Lesbian & Gay Pride 
– CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. 

Other evidence for cultural variation in norms comes from the study 
of how men and women are expected to behave in various societies. 
For example, many traditional societies are simple hunting-and-
gathering societies. In most of these, men tend to hunt and women 
tend to gather. Many observers attribute this gender difference to at 
least two biological differences between the sexes. First, men tend 
to be bigger and stronger than women and are thus better suited 
for hunting. Second, women become pregnant and bear children 


and are less able to hunt. Yet a different pattern emerges in some 
hunting-and-gathering societies. Among a group of Australian 
aborigines called the Tiwi and a tribal society in the Philippines 
called the Agta, both sexes hunt. After becoming pregnant, Agta 
women continue to hunt for most of their pregnancy and resume 
hunting after their child is born (Brettell & Sargent, 2009). 

Some of the most interesting norms that differ by culture govern 
how people stand apart when they talk with each other (Hall & Hall, 
2007). In the United States, people who are not intimates usually 
stand about three to four feet apart when they talk. If someone 
stands more closely to us, especially if we are of northern European 
heritage, we feel uncomfortable. Yet people in other 
countries—especially Italy, France, Spain, and many of the nations 
of Latin America and the Middle East—would feel uncomfortable if 
they were standing three to four feet apart. To them, this distance 
is too great and indicates that the people talking dislike each other. 
If a U.S. native of British or Scandinavian heritage were talking with 
a member of one of these societies, they might well have trouble 
interacting, because at least one of them will be uncomfortable with 
the physical distance separating them. 

Rituals 

Different cultures also have different 
rituals, or established 
procedures and ceremonies that often mark transitions in the life 
course. As such, rituals both reflect and transmit a culture’s norms 
and other elements from one generation to the next. Graduation 
ceremonies in colleges and universities are familiar examples of 
time-honored rituals. In many societies, rituals help signify one’s 
gender identity. For example, girls around the world undergo 
various types of initiation ceremonies to mark their transition to 
adulthood. Among the Bemba of Zambia, girls undergo a month-
long initiation ceremony called the 
chisungu, in which girls learn 


songs, dances, and secret terms that only women know (Maybury-
Lewis, 1998). In some cultures, special ceremonies also mark a girl’s 
first menstrual period. Such ceremonies are largely absent in the 
United States, where a girl’s first period is a private matter. But in 
other cultures the first period is a cause for celebration involving 
gifts, music, and food (Hathaway, 1997). 

Boys have their own initiation ceremonies, some of them involving 
circumcision. That said, the ways in which circumcisions are done 
and the ceremonies accompanying them differ widely. In the United 
States, boys who are circumcised usually undergo a quick procedure 
in the hospital. If their parents are observant Jews, circumcision 
will be part of a religious ceremony, and a religious figure called 
a 
moyel 
will perform the circumcision. In contrast, circumcision 
among the Maasai of East Africa is used as a test of manhood. 
If a boy being circumcised shows signs of fear, he might well be 
ridiculed (Maybury-Lewis, 1998). 

Are rituals more common in traditional societies than in industrial 
ones such as the United States? Consider the Nacirema, studied 
by anthropologist Horace Miner more than 50 years ago (Miner, 
1956). In this society, many rituals have been developed to deal 
with the culture’s fundamental belief that the human body is ugly 
and in danger of suffering many diseases. Reflecting this belief, 
every household has at least one shrine in which various rituals are 
performed to cleanse the body. Often these shrines contain magic 
potions acquired from medicine men. The Nacirema are especially 
concerned about diseases of the mouth. Miner writes, “Were it not 
for the rituals of the mouth, they believe that their teeth would fall 
out, their gums bleed, their jaws shrink, their friends desert them, 
and their lovers reject them” (p. 505). Many Nacirema engage in 
“mouth-rites” and see a “holy-mouth-man” once or twice yearly. 

Spell Nacirema backward and you will see that Miner was 
describing American culture. As his satire suggests, rituals are not 
limited to preindustrial societies. Instead, they function in many 
kinds of societies to mark transitions in the life course and to 
transmit the norms of the culture from one generation to the next. 


Changing Norms and Beliefs 

Our examples show that different cultures have different norms, 
even if they share other types of practices and beliefs. It is also true 
that norms change over time within a given culture. Two obvious 
examples here are hairstyles and clothing styles. When the Beatles 
first became popular in the early 1960s, their hair barely covered 
their ears, but parents of teenagers back then were aghast at how 
they looked. If anything, clothing styles change even more often 
than hairstyles. Hemlines go up, hemlines go down. Lapels become 
wider, lapels become narrower. This color is in, that color is out. 
Hold on to your out-of-style clothes long enough, and eventually 
they may well end up back in style. 

An old newspaper article featuring a picture of The Beatles
Some norms 
may change 
over time 
within a 
given 
culture. In 
the early 
1960s, the 
hair of the 
four 
members of 
the Beatles 
barely 
covered their 
ears, but 
many 
parents of 
U.S. 
teenagers 
were very 
critical of the 
length of 
their hair. 
U.S. Library 
of 
Congress 
– 
public 
domain. 



A more important topic on which norms have changed is abortion 
and birth control (Bullough & Bullough, 1977). Despite the 
controversy surrounding abortion today, it was very common in 
the ancient world. Much later, medieval theologians generally felt 
that abortion was not murder if it occurred within the first several 
weeks after conception. This distinction was eliminated in 1869, 
when Pope Pius IX declared abortion at any time to be murder. In 
the United States, abortion was not illegal until 1828, when New 
York state banned it to protect women from unskilled abortionists, 
and most other states followed suit by the end of the century. 
However, the sheer number of unsafe, illegal abortions over the 
next several decades helped fuel a demand for repeal of abortion 
laws that in turn helped lead to the 
Roe v. Wade 
Supreme Court 
decision in 1973 that generally legalized abortion during the first 
two trimesters. 

Contraception was also practiced in ancient times, only to be 
opposed by early Christianity. Over the centuries, scientific 
discoveries of the nature of the reproductive process led to more 
effective means of contraception and to greater calls for its use, 
despite legal bans on the distribution of information about 
contraception. In the early 1900s, Margaret Sanger, an American 
nurse, spearheaded the growing birth-control movement and 
helped open a birth-control clinic in Brooklyn in 1916. She and two 
other women were arrested within 10 days, and Sanger and one 
other defendant were sentenced to 30 days in jail. Efforts by Sanger 
and other activists helped to change views on contraception over 
time, and finally, in 1965, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 
Griswold v. 
Connecticut 
that contraception information could not be banned. As 
this brief summary illustrates, norms about contraception changed 
dramatically during the last century. 

Other types of cultural beliefs also change over time (Figure 3.2 
“Percentage of People Who Say They Would Vote for a Qualified 
African American for President” 
and 
Figure 3.3 “Percentage of 
People Who Agree Women Should Take Care of Running Their 
Homes”). Since the 1960s, the U.S. public has changed its views 


about some important racial and gender issues. 
Figure 3.2 
“Percentage of People Who Say They Would Vote for a Qualified 
African American for President”, taken from several years of the 
General Social Survey (GSS), shows that the percentage of 
Americans who would vote for a qualified black person as president 
rose almost 20 points from the early 1970s to the middle of 1996, 
when the GSS stopped asking the question. If beliefs about voting 
for an African American had not changed, Barack Obama would 
almost certainly not have been elected in 2008. 
Figure 3.3 
“Percentage of People Who Agree Women Should Take Care of 
Running Their Homes”, also taken from several years of the GSS, 
shows that the percentage saying that women should take care of 
running their homes and leave running the country to men declined 
from almost 36% in the early 1970s to only about 15% in 1998, 
again, when the GSS stopped asking the question. These two figures 
depict declining racial and gender prejudice in the United States 
during the past quarter-century. 

Figure 3.2 
Percentage of People Who Say They Would Vote for a 
Qualified African American for President 

Percentage of People Who Say They Would Vote for a Qualified African American for President
Source: Data 
from General 
Social 
Surveys, 
1972–1996. 

Figure 3.3 
Percentage of People Who Agree Women Should Take 
Care of Running Their Homes 



Percentage of People Who Agree Women Should Take Care of Running Their Homes
Source: Data 
from General 
Social 
Surveys, 
1974–1998. 

Values 

Values 
are another important element of culture and involve 
judgments of what is good or bad and desirable or undesirable. A 
culture’s values shape its norms. In Japan, for example, a central 
value is group harmony. The Japanese place great emphasis on 
harmonious social relationships and dislike interpersonal conflict. 
Individuals are fairly unassertive by American standards, lest they 
be perceived as trying to force their will on others (Schneider & 
Silverman, 2010). When interpersonal disputes do arise, Japanese 
do their best to minimize conflict by trying to resolve the disputes 
amicably. Lawsuits are thus uncommon; in one case involving 
disease and death from a mercury-polluted river, some Japanese 
who dared to sue the company responsible for the mercury 
poisoning were considered bad citizens (Upham, 1976). 



Individualism in the United States 

An empty courtroom
American culture promotes competition and an emphasis on winning in the 
sports and business worlds and in other spheres of life. Accordingly, lawsuits 
over frivolous reasons are common and even expected. Clyde Robinson 
– 
Courtroom 
– CC BY 2.0. 

In the United States, of course, the situation is quite different. The 
American culture extols the rights of the individual and promotes 
competition in the business and sports worlds and in other areas 
of life. Lawsuits over the most frivolous of issues are quite common 
and even expected. Phrases like “Look out for number one!” abound. 
If the Japanese value harmony and group feeling, Americans value 
competition and individualism. Because the Japanese value 
harmony, their norms frown on self-assertion in interpersonal 
relationships and on lawsuits to correct perceived wrongs. Because 
Americans value and even thrive on competition, our norms 


promote assertion in relationships and certainly promote the use of 
the law to address all kinds of problems. 

Figure 3.4 “Percentage of People Who Think Competition Is Very 
Beneficial” 
illustrates this difference between the two nations’ 
cultures with data from the 2002 World Values Survey (WVS), which 
was administered to random samples of the adult populations of 
more than 80 nations around the world. One question asked in 
these nations was, “On a scale of one (‘competition is good; it 
stimulates people to work hard and develop new ideas’) to ten 
(‘competition is harmful; it brings out the worst in people’), please 
indicate your views on competition.” 
Figure 3.4 “Percentage of 
People Who Think Competition Is Very Beneficial” 
shows the 
percentages of Americans and Japanese who responded with a “one” 
or “two” to this question, indicating they think competition is very 
beneficial. Americans are about three times as likely as Japanese to 
favor competition. 

Figure 3.4 
Percentage of People Who Think Competition Is Very 
Beneficial 

Percentage of People Who Think Competition Is Very Beneficial
Source: Data 
from World 
Values 
Survey, 
2002. 

The Japanese value system is a bit of an anomaly, because Japan is 
an industrial nation with very traditional influences. Its emphasis 
on group harmony and community is more usually thought of as 
a value found in traditional societies, while the U.S. emphasis on 
individuality is more usually thought of as a value found in industrial 
cultures. Anthropologist David Maybury-Lewis (1998, p. 8) describes 



this difference as follows: “The heart of the difference between the 
modern world and the traditional one is that in traditional societies 
people are a valuable resource and the interrelations between them 
are carefully tended; in modern society things are the valuables 
and people are all too often treated as disposable.” In industrial 
societies, continues Maybury-Lewis, individualism and the rights of 
the individual are celebrated and any one person’s obligations to the 
larger community are weakened. Individual achievement becomes 
more important than values such as kindness, compassion, and 
generosity. 

Other scholars take a less bleak view of industrial society, where 
they say the spirit of community still lives even as individualism 
is extolled (Bellah, Madsen, Sullivan, Swidler, & Tipton, 1985). In 
American society, these two simultaneous values sometimes create 
tension. In Appalachia, for example, people view themselves as 
rugged individuals who want to control their own fate. At the same 
time, they have strong ties to families, relatives, and their neighbors. 
Thus their sense of independence conflicts with their need for 
dependence on others (Erikson, 1976). 

The Work Ethic 

Another important value in the American culture is the work ethic. 
By the 19th century, Americans had come to view hard work not just 
as something that had to be done but as something that was morally 
good to do (Gini, 2000). The commitment to the work ethic remains 
strong today: in the 2008 General Social Survey, 72% of respondents 
said they would continue to work even if they got enough money to 
live as comfortably as they would like for the rest of their lives. 

Cross-cultural evidence supports the importance of the work 
ethic in the United States. Using earlier World Values Survey 
data, 
Figure 3.5 “Percentage of People Who Take a Great Deal of 
Pride in Their Work” 
presents the percentage of people in United 


States and three other nations from different parts of the 
world—Mexico, Poland, and Japan—who take “a great deal of pride” 
in their work. More than 85% of Americans feel this way, compared 
to much lower proportions of people in the other three nations. 

Figure 3.5 
Percentage of People Who Take a Great Deal of Pride in 
Their Work 

Percentage of People Who Take a Great Deal of Pride in Their Work
Source: Data 
from World 
Values 
Survey, 1993. 

Closely related to the work ethic is the belief that if people work 
hard enough, they will be successful. Here again the American 
culture is especially thought to promote the idea that people can 
pull themselves up by their “bootstraps” if they work hard enough. 
The WVS asked whether success results from hard work or from 
luck and connections. 
Figure 3.6 “Percentage of People Who Think 
Hard Work Brings Success” 
presents the proportions of people in 
the four nations just examined who most strongly thought that hard 
work brings success. Once again we see evidence of an important 
aspect of the American culture, as U.S. residents were especially 
likely to think that hard work brings success. 

Figure 3.6 
Percentage of People Who Think Hard Work Brings 
Success 



Percentage of People Who Think Hard Work Brings Success
Source: Data 
from World 
Values 
Survey, 1997. 

If Americans believe hard work brings success, then they should 
be more likely than people in most other nations to believe that 
poverty stems from not working hard enough. True or false, this 
belief is an example of the blaming-the-victim ideology introduced 
in 
Chapter 1 “Sociology and the Sociological Perspective”. 
Figure 3.7 
“Percentage of People Who Attribute Poverty to Laziness and Lack 
of Willpower” 
presents WVS percentages of respondents who said 
the most important reason people are poor is “laziness and lack 
of willpower.” As expected, Americans are much more likely to 
attribute poverty to not working hard enough. 

Figure 3.7 
Percentage of People Who Attribute Poverty to Laziness 
and Lack of Willpower 

Percentage of People Who Attribute Poverty to Laziness and Lack of Willpower
Source: Data 
from World 
Values 
Survey, 1997. 

We could discuss many other values, but an important one concerns 
how much a society values women’s employment outside the home. 



The WVS asked respondents whether they agree that “when jobs 
are scarce men should have more right to a job than women.” 
Figure 
3.8 “Percentage of People Who Disagree That Men Have More Right 
to a Job Than Women When Jobs Are Scarce” 
shows that U.S. 
residents are more likely than those in nations with more traditional 
views of women to 
disagree 
with this statement. 

Figure 3.8 
Percentage of People Who Disagree That Men Have More 
Right to a Job Than Women When Jobs Are Scarce 

Percentage of People Who Disagree That Men Have More Right to a Job Than Women When Jobs Are Scarce
Source: Data 
from World 
Values 
Survey, 
2002. 

Artifacts 

The last element of culture is the 
artifacts, or material objects, that 
constitute a society’s material culture. In the most simple societies, 
artifacts are largely limited to a few tools, the huts people live in, 
and the clothing they wear. One of the most important inventions 
in the evolution of society was the wheel. 
Figure 3.9 “Primary Means 
of Moving Heavy Loads” 
shows that very few of the societies in the 
SCCS use wheels to move heavy loads over land, while the majority 
use human power and about one-third use pack animals. 

Figure 3.9 
Primary Means of Moving Heavy Loads 



Primary means of moving heavy loads: 57.5% human bearers, 30.6% pack animals, 11.8% wheel
Source: Data 
from 
Standard 
Cross-Cultural Sample. 

Although the wheel was a great invention, artifacts are much more 
numerous and complex in industrial societies. Because of 
technological advances during the past two decades, many such 
societies today may be said to have a 
wireless 
culture, as 
smartphones, netbooks and laptops, and GPS devices now dominate 
so much of modern life. The artifacts associated with this culture 
were unknown a generation ago. Technological development 
created these artifacts and new language to describe them and 
the functions they perform. Today’s wireless artifacts in turn help 
reinforce our own commitment to wireless technology as a way of 
life, if only because children are now growing up with them, often 
even before they can read and write. 



An iPhone being charged
The iPhone is just one of the many notable cultural artifacts in today’s 
wireless world. Technological development created these artifacts and new 
language to describe them and their functions—for example, “There’s an app 
for that!” Philip Brooks – 
iPhone 
– CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. 

Sometimes people in one society may find it difficult to understand 
the artifacts that are an important part of another society’s culture. 
If a member of a tribal society who had never seen a cell phone, or 
who had never even used batteries or electricity, were somehow to 
visit the United States, she or he would obviously have no idea of 
what a cell phone was or of its importance in almost everything we 
do these days. Conversely, if we were to visit that person’s society, 
we might not appreciate the importance of some of its artifacts. 

In this regard, consider once again India’s cows, discussed in 
the news article that began this chapter. As the article mentioned, 
people from India consider cows holy, and they let cows roam the 
streets of many cities. In a nation where hunger is so rampant, 
such cow worship is difficult to understand, at least to Americans, 
because a ready source of meat is being ignored. 

Anthropologist Marvin Harris (1974) advanced a practical 
explanation for India’s cow worship. Millions of Indians are peasants 
who rely on their farms for their food and thus their existence. Oxen 
and water buffalo, not tractors, are the way they plow their fields. If 


their ox falls sick or dies, farmers may lose their farms. Because, as 
Harris observes, oxen are made by cows, it thus becomes essential 
to preserve cows at all costs. In India, cows also act as an essential 
source of fertilizer, to the tune of 700 million tons of manure 
annually, about half of which is used for fertilizer and the other 
half of which is used as fuel for cooking. Cow manure is also mixed 
with water and used as flooring material over dirt floors in Indian 
households. For all of these reasons, cow worship is not so puzzling 
after all, because it helps preserve animals that are very important 
for India’s economy and other aspects of its way of life. 

A Cow on the streets in Mumbai
According to anthropologist Marvin Harris, cows are worshipped in India 
because they are such an important part of India’s agricultural economy. 
Francisco Martins – 
Cow in Mumbai 
– CC BY-NC 2.0. 

If Indians exalt cows, many Jews and Muslims feel the opposite 
about pigs: they refuse to eat any product made from pigs and so 
obey an injunction from the Old Testament of the Bible and from the 
Koran. Harris thinks this injunction existed because pig farming in 


ancient times would have threatened the ecology of the Middle East. 
Sheep and cattle eat primarily grass, while pigs eat foods that people 
eat, such as nuts, fruits, and especially grains. In another problem, 
pigs do not provide milk and are much more difficult to herd than 
sheep or cattle. Next, pigs do not thrive well in the hot, dry climate 
in which the people of the Old Testament and Koran lived. Finally, 
sheep and cattle were a source of food back then because beyond 
their own meat they provided milk, cheese, and manure, and cattle 
were also used for plowing. In contrast, pigs would have provided 
only their own meat. Because sheep and cattle were more “versatile” 
in all of these ways, and because of the other problems pigs would 
have posed, it made sense for the eating of pork to be prohibited. 

In contrast to Jews and Muslims, at least one society, the Maring 
of the mountains of New Guinea, is characterized by “pig love.” Here 
pigs are held in the highest regard. The Maring sleep next to pigs, 
give them names and talk to them, feed them table scraps, and once 
or twice every generation have a mass pig sacrifice that is intended 
to ensure the future health and welfare of Maring society. Harris 
explains their love of pigs by noting that their climate is ideally 
suited to raising pigs, which are an important source of meat for 
the Maring. Because too many pigs would overrun the Maring, their 
periodic pig sacrifices help keep the pig population to manageable 
levels. Pig love thus makes as much sense for the Maring as pig 
hatred did for people in the time of the Old Testament and the 
Koran. 


Key Takeaways 

The major elements of culture are symbols, 
language, norms, values, and artifacts. 
Language makes effective social interaction 
possible and influences how people conceive of 
concepts and objects. 
Major values that distinguish the United States 
include individualism, competition, and a 
commitment to the work ethic. 


For Your Review 

1. How and why does the development of language 
illustrate the importance of culture and provide 
evidence for the sociological perspective? 
2. Some people say the United States is too 
individualistic and competitive, while other people 
say these values are part of what makes America 



great. What do you think? Why? 


References 

Axtell, R. E. (1998). 
Gestures: The do’s and taboos of body language 
around the world. New York, NY: Wiley. 

Bellah, R. N., Madsen, R., Sullivan, W. M., Swidler, A., & Tipton, S. 
M. (1985). 
Habits of the heart: Individualism and commitment in 
American life. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Brettell, C. B., & Sargent, C. F. (Eds.). (2009). 
Gender in cross-cultural 
perspective 
(5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Brown, R. (2009, January 24). Nashville voters reject a proposal for 
English-only. 
The New York Times, p. A12. 

Bullough, V. L., & Bullough, B. (1977). 
Sin, sickness, and sanity: A 
history of sexual attitudes. New York, NY: New American Library. 

Dixon, J. C. (2006). The ties that bind and those that don’t: Toward 
reconciling group threat and contact theories of prejudice. 
Social 
Forces, 84, 
2179–2204. 

Edgerton, R. (1976). 
Deviance: A cross-cultural perspective. Menlo 
Park, CA: Cummings. 

Erikson, K. T. (1976). 
Everything in its path: Destruction of community 
in the Buffalo Creek flood. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster. 

Gini, A. (2000). 
My job, my self: Work and the creation of the modern 
individual. New York, NY: Routledge. 

Hall, E. T., & Hall, M. R. (2007). The sounds of silence. In J. M. Henslin 
(Ed.), 
Down to earth sociology: Introductory readings 
(pp. 109–117). 
New York, NY: Free Press. 

Harris, M. (1974). 
Cows, pigs, wars, and witches: The riddles of culture. 
New York, NY: Vintage Books. 

Hathaway, N. (1997). Menstruation and menopause: Blood rites. In L. 


M. Salinger (Ed.), 
Deviant behavior 97/98 
(pp. 12–15). Guilford, CT: 
Dushkin. 

Laar, C. V., Levin, S., Sinclair, S., & Sidanius, J. (2005). The effect 
of university roommate contact on ethnic attitudes and 
behavior. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41, 
329–345. 

Maggio, R. (1998). 
The dictionary of bias-free usage: A guide to 
nondiscriminatory language. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press. 

Maybury-Lewis, D. (1998). Tribal wisdom. In K. Finsterbusch 
(Ed.), 
Sociology 98/99 
(pp. 8–12). Guilford, CT: Dushkin/McGraw-
Hill. 

Miles, S. (2008). 
Language and sexism. New York, NY: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Miner, H. (1956). Body ritual among the Nacirema. 
American 
Anthropologist, 58, 
503–507. 

Murdock, G. P., & White, D. R. (1969). Standard cross-cultural 
sample. 
Ethnology, 8, 
329–369. 

Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2005). Allport’s intergroup contact 
hypothesis: Its history and influence. In J. F. Dovidio, P. S. Glick, 
& L. A. Rudman (Eds.), 
On the nature of prejudice: Fifty years after 
Allport 
(pp. 262–277). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 

Ray, S. (2007). Politics over official language in the United 
States. 
International Studies, 44, 
235–252. 

Schneider, L., & Silverman, A. (2010). 
Global sociology: Introducing 
five contemporary societies 
(5th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 

Shook, N. J., & Fazio, R. H. (2008). Interracial roommate 
relationships: An experimental test of the contact 
hypothesis. 
Psychological Science, 19, 
717–723. 

Shook, N. J., & Fazio, R. H. (2008). Roommate relationships: A 
comparison of interracial and same-race living situations. 
Group 
Processes & Intergroup Relations, 11, 
425–437. 

Upham, F. K. (1976). Litigation and moral consciousness in Japan: 
An interpretive analysis of four Japanese pollution suits. 
Law and 
Society Review, 10, 
579–619. 

Whorf, B. (1956). 
Language, thought and reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 


Attributions 

Adapted from Chapter 3.2 from Sociology by the University of 
Minnesota under the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where 
otherwise noted. 


PART 
IV 
THE SOCIAL CHANGE 
DIMENSION 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore Theories of Racism, Discrimination, and 
Oppression on the macro level and how it impacts 
on the micro/mezzo levels 
Describe Attribution Theory 
Describe the Vicious Cycle 
Describe Social and Economic Perspectives 
Describe Social Action and Social Change 
Perspectives 
Define Community 
Describe Community Organization Theory 



Vignette 

Otis wearing his backpack
Photo by nana o. on Unsplash 

Otis, a 9 y/o African 
American boy, has been in the 
foster care system for just over 
one year, after his mother was 
arrested and convicted of 
prostitution. No relatives were 
found to care for Otis and his 
younger brother, and they were 
separated into different foster 
homes. Otis experienced 
placement in a few different 
foster homes (all Caucasian 
families) before being placed 
with an African American 
family, where he has been for the 
past 6 months. 
He was observed 
to be adjusting fairly well despite 
the continued inconsistencies of visits with his mother and his 
mother’s shortcomings in completing the plan to reunite their family. 
He was making friends and enjoyed his visits with his younger 
brother. His mother’s parental rights were recently terminated, and 
Otis experienced another move when placed with his new adoptive 
family. 

The Johnson family have adopted Otis. His adoptive parents are an 
older, wealthy Caucasian couple, Bill and Christina, who have 2 other 
daughters, 
both older than Otis. They are trying their best to make 
Otis feel welcome and a part of their family but have noticed Otis 
does not seem to be adjusting well, even though he has been with them 
for almost 6 months. He rarely looks them in the eye, hardly responds 
when his adoptive sisters try to engage him, and has hardly been 
eating or sleeping. His teachers report Otis is typically withdrawn 
each day, demonstrating little interactions with his teachers and 


peers. The Johnson’s have decided to begin family therapy with Otis as 
they do not know what to do and want to do their best in supporting 
him. Otis is able to report feeling out of place within his new 
environments as he has been the only African American person 
present in most of his new settings and is not sure how he fits into his 
new life. 

The Social Change Dimension 

This dimension explores theories of racism, discrimination, 
oppression, and privilege on the macro level and explores how it 
impacts individuals on the micro/mezzo levels. We will also explore 
Social and Economic Justice perspectives, Social Change and Social 
Action perspectives, and Community Organization theories. 

But first, let’s start with some vocabulary words: 

Social Change Dimension Vocabulary Words: 

Stereotypes – an over-generalized belief about a 
particular group of people. 

Prejudice – preconceived opinion that is not based on 
reason or actual experience. 

Discrimination – the unjust or prejudicial treatment 
of different categories of people or things, especially on 
the grounds of race, age, or sex. 

Race – a class or kind of people unified by shared 
interests, habits, or characteristics. 

Racism – prejudice, discrimination, or antagonism 
directed against someone of a different race based on 
the belief that one’s own race is superior. 

Oppression – prolonged cruel or unjust treatment or 


control. 

Primary Oppression – Active and purposeful. Use of 
force or deprivation through laws, policies, or 
regulations that discriminate against people perceived 
to be inferior to the dominant group. 

Secondary Oppression – Not active, but still benefit 
from it. An example would be staying silent when 
oppressive acts are occurring such as extending a job 
offer to a person of the dominant group but not to an 
equally qualified member of a minority group. 

Tertiary Oppression – When members of an 
oppressed group seek acceptance by supporting 
oppressive acts of the dominant group – abandoning 
their own group or “selling out” to seek approval and 
admission with the dominant group. 

Attribution Theory explores how we observe and make judgments 
about others. 

Dispositional attributions – judges behavior due to inherent 
qualities, motivations, or characteristics of a person (lazy, careless, 
rude, impatient, unmotivated). 

Situational attributions – judges behavior through situational 
factors that are often outside of a person’s control (bad weather, 
poor economy, bad luck). 

This theory also suggests we tend to have more positive thoughts 
about people like us (and connect more to situational attributions) 
and tend to place blame on people/groups that are different from 
us (and connect more to dispositional attributions). 

The Vicious Cycle states when certain conditions (prejudices) are 
assumed to be true, forces may be set in motion to create and 
perpetuate the assumed condition (leading to discrimination). This 
allows the dominant group to limit opportunities for the group in 


the secondary position and continue holding the power position 
within their group. 

Social Learning Theory and Conflict Theory can also offer help in 
understanding the origins and structures of prejudice and 
discrimination. 

Otis’ story – Within Theories of Racism, 
Discrimination, and Oppression we would first want to 
explore how societal or historical beliefs have impacted 
Otis and his family. As an African American family living 
in poverty, it may be easy for people to believe stereotypes 
and prejudices about his family and why they were in 
their situation, connecting more to dispositional 
attributions rather than situational attributions. His 
mother’s arrest may reinforce stereotypes/prejudices and 
he may feel the effects of the vicious cycle and begin to 
internalize these thoughts/feelings. We then move to the 
foster care system, exploring possible issues connected to 
systemic racism and how this may impact his experience 
on the micro level. He was first placed with a few different 
families, all Caucasian, before being placed in a family of 
same the race, where he was reported to be adjusting well 
in that environment. He was then placed in his adoptive 
home with a family of different race and much higher 
socioeconomic status than his family of origin. Here Otis 
is reported to struggle with adjustment in all areas 
(family, school, peers). 

What issues do you imagine he is facing in his new 
home? Macro level concerns could be connected to polices 
related to foster care and adoption, historical impacts of 
group experiences, and how discrimination and prejudice 
can impact marginalized populations. Mezzo level 


concerns could be connected to interactions with his 
adoptive family, school, peers, teachers, as well as his 
family of origin. Micro level concerns could be connected 
to his mental health needs as he has experienced trauma 
with removal from his family of origin, adjustments to his 
foster homes and now adoptive home, possible physical 
health issues due to chronic stressors, or feeling lack of a 
support system. 


Social and Economic Justice perspectives: 

The promotion of social justice is a core value and ethical principle 
of the social work profession. 

Social Justice – justice in terms of the distribution of wealth, 
opportunities, and privileges within a society. 

Distributive Justice – concept that addresses the ownership of 
goods in a society. It assumes that there is a large amount of fairness 
in the distribution of goods. Equal work should provide individuals 
with an equal outcome in terms of goods acquired or the ability to 
acquire goods. 

Think About It: I encourage you to think about these 
perspectives. Do you believe this is something we can 
actually achieve? Is it fair? Why or why not? What are 
barriers that interfere with this? 

Social Change and Social Action perspectives: 

Social Action – people coming together to help improve their lives 
and solve the problems that are important in their communities. 

Social Movement – a type of group action which typically focuses 


on political or social issues. 

Advocacy – any action that speaks in favor of, recommends, argues 
for a cause, supports or defends, or pleads on behalf of others that 
lack the skills, resources, or power to represent themselves. 

Advocacy is another foundation intervention utilized in 
Social Work. Our goal is to teach others the skills of how 
to advocate for themselves but there are times we as 
Social Workers must step in and provide this support for 
our clients that cannot do so for themselves. We also 
support work in Social Action within our communities 
and across our country to lead to Social Movements to 
work in making change on the macro level. 

Community – can be defined as a group of people living in the 
same place or having a particular characteristic in common or a 
feeling of fellowship with others, as a result of sharing common 
attitudes, interests, and goals. 

Territorial Community – geographical type of community. 

Relational Community – people, groups, and organizations whose 
connections are based upon commonalities or identification and 
are not limited by place or geography. 

Community Organization Theory explores 3 contexts 
Social Workers use to understand community from a 
macro-based perspective. Please see below: 


1. Community as the milieu in which practice 
actually occurs. 

Social Workers help define the weaknesses and/or 
needs of a community, and what resources or 
interventions may benefit the community. 

Locality Development Model: Social Workers uses the 
skills of community members to create change. 
Community members are recruited and organized to 
discuss issues, possible solutions, and ways to 
implement interventions. 

2. Community as the change target. 

Assessments and interventions completed by outside 
parties, rather than members of the community. 

Social Planning Model: Social Workers, or other 
professionals, take lead on determining community 
issues, and what 

interventions should be used. 

Community members “Contract” with outside Social 
Workers. 

3. Community as a mechanism for change. 

Community members have the skills and abilities to 
create change; the Social Worker helps members 
identify and use their strengths. 

Social Action Model: Social Workers empower 
community members to create change. Social Workers 
organize and guide the community, but the community 
must effect the desired change in the end. 




It is important to explore the needs of the community to 
determine which course of action is best to provide the 
supports for their needs. It is also important to remember 
to utilize the Strength’s Perspective when working with a 
community as their strengths will often help determine 
the supports and solutions needed. 

Please continue on to Chapter 6: Social Categorizations and 
Stereotypes, Chapter 7: In Group Favoritism and Prejudice, Chapter 
8: Reducing Discrimination, and Chapter 9: Racism for further 
exploration and learning. 

Key Takeaways: 

Theories of Racism, Discrimination, and 
Oppression explores how people are impacted on 
each level and within their systems. 
The promotion of social justice is a core value 
and ethical principle of the social work profession. 
Territorial Community – geographical type of 
community. 
Relational Community – people, groups, and 
organizations whose connections are based upon 
commonalities or identification and are not 



limited by place or geography. 
Community Organization Theory – 3 Contexts 
Social Workers use to understand community 
from a macro-based perspective. 
Check out this case study, Exploring 
Unintentional Racism: The Case of Tim Hanks, 
designed to help you explore your attitudes about 
race and learn about the complexity of the 
concept of racism. 


References 

Rogers, A. (2013). 
Human behavior in the social environment (Fourth 
Edition.) New York: Routledge. 


Chapter 5: Social 
Categorization & 
Stereotyping 

Chapter 5 Learning Objectives 

Describe the fundamental process of social 
categorization and its influence on thoughts, feelings, 
and behavior. 
Define 
stereotypes 
and describe the ways that 
stereotypes are measured. 
Review the ways that stereotypes influence our 
behavior. 


Thinking about others in terms of their group memberships is 
known as 
social categorization—the natural cognitive process by 
which we place individuals into social groups. 
Social categorization 
occurs when we think of someone as a man (versus a woman), 
an old person (versus a young person), a Black person (versus an 
Asian or White person), and so on (Allport, 1954/1979). Just as we 
categorize objects into different types, so we categorize people 
according to their social group memberships. Once we do so, we 
begin to respond to those people more as members of a social group 
than as individuals. 


Imagine for a moment that two college students, John and Sarah, 
are talking at a table in the student union at your college or 
university. At this point, we would probably not consider them to 
be acting as group members, but rather as two individuals. John 
is expressing his opinions, and Sarah is expressing hers. Imagine, 
however, that as the conversation continues, Sarah brings up an 
assignment that she is completing for her women’s studies class. 
It turns out that John does not think there should be a women’s 
studies program at the college, and he tells Sarah so. He argues 
that if there is a women’s studies program, then there should be 
a men’s studies program too. Furthermore, he argues that women 
are getting too many breaks in job hiring and that qualified men are 
the targets of discrimination. Sarah feels quite the contrary—arguing 
that women have been the targets of sexism for many, many years 
and even now do not have the same access to high-paying jobs that 
men do. 

You can see that an interaction that began at individual level, as 
two individuals conversing, has now turned to the group level, in 
which John has begun to consider himself as a man, and Sarah has 
begun to consider herself as a woman. In short, Sarah is now arguing 
her points not so much for herself as she is as a representative 
of one of her ingroups—namely, women—and John is acting as a 
representative of one of his ingroups—namely, men. Sarah feels that 
her positions are correct, and she believes they are true not only 
for her but for women in general. And the same is true of John. You 
can see that these social categorizations may create some potential 
for misperception, and perhaps even hostility. And John and Sarah 
may even change their opinions about each other, forgetting that 
they really like each other as individuals, because they are now 
responding more as group members with opposing views. 

Imagine now that while John and Sarah are still talking, some 
students from another college, each wearing the hats and jackets of 
that school, show up in the student union. The presence of these 
outsiders might change the direction of social categorization 
entirely, leading both John and Sarah to think of themselves as 


students at their own college. And this social categorization might 
lead them to become more aware of the positive characteristics 
of their college (the excellent basketball team, lovely campus, and 
intelligent students) in comparison with the characteristics of the 
other school. Now, rather than perceiving themselves as members 
of two different groups (men versus women), John and Sarah might 
suddenly perceive themselves as members of the same social 
category (students at their college). 

Perhaps this example will help you see the flexibility of social 
categorization. We sometimes think of our relationships with others 
at the individual level and sometimes at the group level. And which 
groups we use in social categorization can change over time and in 
different situations. I think you would agree that you are more likely 
to categorize yourself as a member of your college or university 
when your basketball or football team has just won a really 
important game, or at your commencement day ceremony, than you 
would on a normal evening out with your family. In these cases, 
your membership as a university student is simply more salient and 
important than it is every day, and you are more likely to categorize 
yourself accordingly. 

Spontaneous Social Categorization 

Social categorization occurs spontaneously, without much thought 
on our part (Crisp & Hewstone, 2007). Shelley Taylor and her 
colleagues (Taylor, Fiske, Etcoff, & Ruderman, 1978) showed their 
research participants a slide and tape presentation of three male 
and three female college students who had supposedly participated 
in a discussion group. During the presentation, each member of 
the discussion group made a suggestion about how to advertise a 
college play. The statements were controlled so that across all the 
research participants, the statements made by the men and the 
women were of equal length and quality. Furthermore, one half of 


the participants were told that when the presentation was over, 
they would be asked to remember which person had made which 
suggestion, whereas the other half of the participants were told 
merely to observe the interaction without attending to anything in 
particular. 

After they had viewed all the statements made by the individuals 
in the discussion group, the research participants were given a 
memory test (this was entirely unexpected for the participants who 
had not been given memory instructions). The participants were 
shown the list of all the statements that had been made, along 
with the pictures of each of the discussion group members, and 
were asked to indicate who had made each of the statements. The 
research participants were not very good at this task, and yet when 
they made mistakes, these errors were very systematic. 

As you can see in 
Table 12.1 “Name Confusions”, the mistakes were 
such that the statements that had actually been made by a man 
were more frequently wrongly attributed to another man in the 
group than to another woman, and the statements actually made 
by a woman were more frequently attributed to other women in 
the group than to a man. The participants evidently categorized the 
speakers by their gender, leading them to make more within-gender 
than across-gender confusions. 

Interestingly, and suggesting that categorization is occurring all 
the time, the instructions that the participants had been given made 
absolutely no difference. There was just as much categorization 
for those who were not given any instructions as for those who 
were told to remember who said what. Other research using this 
technique has found that we spontaneously categorize each other 
on the basis of many other group memberships, including race, 
academic status (student versus teacher), social roles, and other 
social categories (Fiske, Haslam, & Fiske, 1991; Stangor, Lynch, Duan, 
& Glass, 1992). 

Table 12.1 
Name Confusions 


Instructions Within race errors Between race errors 
Memory 5.78 4.29 
No memory 6.57 4.36 
Taylor, Fiske, Etcoff, and Ruderman (1978) demonstrated that people 
categorized others spontaneously. Even without any instructions to 
categorize, people nevertheless confused others by their sex. 

The conclusion is simple, if perhaps obvious: Social categorization 
is occurring all around us all the time. Indeed, social categorization 
occurs so quickly that people may have difficulty 
not 
thinking about 
others in terms of their group memberships (see 
Figure 12.3). 


A man in inconspicuous drag
Figure 12.3 If you are like most people, you will have a strong desire to 
categorize this person as either male or female. drburtoni – 
Transgenders March, Portland 2015 SERIES – CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. 

The Benefits of Social Categorization 

The tendency to categorize others is normally quite useful. In some 
cases, we categorize because doing so provides us with information 
about the characteristics of people who belong to certain social 


using social categories will only be informative to the extent that the 
stereotypes held by the individual about that category are accurate. 
If police officers were actually not that knowledgeable about the 
groups (Lee, Jussim, & McCauley, 1995). If you found yourself lost 
in a city, you might look for a police officer or a taxi driver to 
help you find your way. In this case, social categorization would 
probably be useful because a police officer or a taxi driver might be 
particularly likely to know the layout of the city streets. Of course, 
city layout, then using this categorization would not be informative. 

It has been argued that there is a kernel of truth in most 
stereotypes, and this seems to be the case. There is a correlation 
between how group members perceive the stereotypes of their own 
groups and how people from other groups perceive those same 
stereotypes (Judd & Park, 1993; Swim, 1994). This truth may come 
in part from the roles that individuals play in society. For instance, 
the stereotypes (which are held by many people) that women are 
“nurturing” and that men are “dominant” may occur in part because, 
on average, men and women find themselves in different social 
roles within a culture (Eagly & Steffen, 1984). In most cultures, men 
are more likely to be in higher-status occupations, such as doctors 
and lawyers, whereas women are more likely to play the role of 
homemakers and child-care workers. In this sense, the stereotypes 
are at least partly true for many of the members of the social 
category, in terms of their actual behaviors. Because men are more 
likely to be leaders than are women, they may well be, on average, 
more dominant; and because women are more likely to take care of 
children, they may, on average, act in a more nurturing way than do 
men. 

On the other hand, we sometimes categorize others not because 
it seems to provide more information about them but because we 
may not have the time (or the motivation) to do anything more 
thorough. Using our stereotypes to size up another person might 
simply make our life easier (Macrae, Bodenhausen, Milne, & Jetten, 
1994). According to this approach, thinking about other people in 
terms of their social category memberships is a functional way 


of dealing with the world—things are complicated, and we reduce 
complexity by relying on our stereotypes. 

The Negative Outcomes of Social Categorization 

Although thinking about others in terms of their social category 
memberships has some potential benefits for the person who does 
the categorizing, categorizing others, rather than treating them as 
unique individuals with their own unique characteristics, has a wide 
variety of negative, and often very unfair, outcomes for those who 
are categorized. 

One problem is that social categorization distorts our perceptions 
such that we tend to exaggerate the differences between people 
from different social groups while at the same time perceiving 
members of groups (and particularly outgroups) as more similar to 
each other than they actually are. This overgeneralization makes 
it more likely that we will think about and treat all members of a 
group the same way. Tajfel and Wilkes (1963) performed a simple 
experiment that provided a picture of the potential outcomes of 
categorization. As you can see in 
Figure 12.4 “Perceptual 
Accentuation”, the experiment involved having research 
participants judge the length of six lines. In one of the experimental 
conditions, participants simply saw six lines, whereas in the other 
condition, the lines were systematically categorized into two 
groups—one comprising the three shorter lines and one comprising 
the three longer lines. 


Perceptual Accentuation: Lines C and D were seen as the same length in the noncategorized condition, but line C was perceived as longer than line D when the lines were categorized into two groups.
Figure 
12.4 
Perceptual 
Accentuation 

Lines C and D were seen as the same length in the noncategorized 
condition, but line C was perceived as longer than line D when the 
lines were categorized into two groups. From Tajfel (1970). 

Tajfel found that the lines were perceived differently when they 
were categorized, such that the differences between the groups and 
the similarities within the groups were emphasized. Specifically, he 
found that although lines C and D (which are actually the same 
length) were perceived as equal in length when the lines were not 
categorized, line D was perceived as being significantly longer than 
line C in the condition in which the lines were categorized. In this 
case, categorization into two groups—the “short lines group” and 



the “long lines group”—produced a perceptual bias such that the two 
groups of lines were seen as more different than they really were. 

Similar effects occur when we categorize other people. We tend 
to see people who belong to the same social group as more similar 
than they actually are, and we tend to judge people from different 
social groups as more different than they actually are. The tendency 
to see members of social groups as similar to each other is 
particularly strong for members of outgroups, resulting in 
outgroup 
homogeneity—the tendency to view members of outgroups as more 
similar to each other than we see members of ingroups 
(Linville, 
Salovey, & Fischer, 1986; Ostrom & Sedikides, 1992; Meissner & 
Brigham, 2001). I’m sure you’ve had this experience yourself, when 
you found yourself thinking or saying, “Oh, them, they’re all the 
same!” 

Patricia Linville and Edward Jones (1980) gave research 
participants a list of trait terms and asked them to think about either 
members of their own group (e.g., Blacks) or members of another 
group (e.g., Whites) and to place the trait terms into piles that 
represented different types of people in the group. The results of 
these studies, as well as other studies like them, were clear: People 
perceive outgroups as more homogeneous than the ingroup. Just 
as White people used fewer piles of traits to describe Blacks than 
Whites, young people used fewer piles of traits to describe elderly 
people than they did young people, and students used fewer piles 
for members of other universities than they did for members of 
their own university. 

Outgroup homogeneity occurs in part because we don’t have as 
much contact with outgroup members as we do with ingroup 
members, and the quality of interaction with outgroup members is 
often more superficial. This prevents us from really learning about 
the outgroup members as individuals, and as a result, we tend to be 
unaware of the differences among the group members. In addition 
to learning less about them because we see and interact with them 
less, we routinely categorize outgroup members, thus making them 
appear more cognitively similar (Haslam, Oakes, & Turner, 1996). 


Once we begin to see the members of outgroups as more similar 
to each other than they actually are, it then becomes very easy 
to apply our stereotypes to the members of the groups without 
having to consider whether the characteristic is actually true of the 
particular individual. If men think that women are all alike, then they 
may also think that they all have the same characteristics—they’re 
all “emotional” and “weak.” And women may have similarly simplified 
beliefs about men (they’re “insensitive,” “unwilling to commit,” etc.). 
The outcome is that the stereotypes become linked to the group 
itself in a set of mental representations (Figure 12.5). The 
stereotypes are “pictures in our heads” of the social groups 
(Lippman, 1922). These beliefs just seem right and natural, even 
though they are frequently distorted overgeneralizations 
(Hirschfeld, 1996; Yzerbyt, Schadron, Leyens, & Rocher, 1994). 

College professors may seem to be Absent minded, but also intelligent
Figure 12.5 opacity – 
oral histories presenter 
– CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. 

Stereotypes are the beliefs associated with social categories. The 
figure shows links between the social category of college professors 
and its stereotypes as a type of neural network or schema. The 


representation also includes one image (or exemplar) of a particular 
college professor whom the student knows. 

Our stereotypes and prejudices are learned through many different 
processes. This multiplicity of causes is unfortunate because it 
makes stereotypes and prejudices even more likely to form and 
harder to change. For one, we learn our stereotypes in part through 
our communications with parents and peers (Aboud & Doyle, 1996) 
and from the behaviors we see portrayed in the media (Brown, 1995). 
Even 5-year-old children have learned cultural norms about the 
appropriate activities and behaviors for boys and girls and also have 
developed stereotypes about age, race, and physical attractiveness 
(Bigler & Liben, 2006). And there is often good agreement about 
the stereotypes of social categories among the individuals within a 
given culture. In one study assessing stereotypes, Stephanie Madon 
and her colleagues (Madon et al., 2001) presented U.S. college 
students with a list of 84 trait terms and asked them to indicate for 
which groups each trait seemed appropriate (Figure 12.6 “Current 
Stereotypes Held by College Students”). The participants tended to 
agree about what traits were true of which groups, and this was 
true even for groups of which the respondents were likely to never 
have met a single member (Arabs and Russians). Even today, there is 
good agreement about the stereotypes of members of many social 
groups, including men and women and a variety of ethnic groups. 

Figure 12.6 
Current Stereotypes Held by College Students 


Americans % Blacks % Italians % 
Materialistic 53.6 Musical 27.6 Loyal to family 
ties 62.7 
Lazy 30.4 Pleasure loving 26 Tradition loving 47.5 
Individualistic 28.6 Loud 20.7 Passionate 39 
Pleasure loving 28 Aggressive 15.5 Religious 37.3 
Industrious 23.2 Artistic 13.8 Quick tempered 35.6 
Germans % Jews % Chinese % 
Intelligent 45.8 Very religious 52.5 Intelligent 60.3 
Industrious 37.3 Intelligent 49.2 Loyal to family 
ties 41.4 
Nationalistic 30.5 Tradition loving 32.2 Reserved 36.2 
Scientifically 
minded 27.1 Shrewd 30.5 Industrious 32.8 
Methodical 20.3 Loyal to family 
ties 28.8 Tradition loving 31 

Once they become established, stereotypes (like any other cognitive 
representation) tend to persevere. We begin to respond to members 
of stereotyped categories as if we already knew what they were 
like. Yaacov Trope and Eric Thompson (1997) found that individuals 
addressed fewer questions to members of categories about which 
they had strong stereotypes (as if they already knew what these 
people were like) and that the questions they did ask were likely to 
confirm the stereotypes they already had. 

In other cases, stereotypes are maintained because information 
that confirms our stereotypes is better remembered than 
information that disconfirms them. When we see members of social 
groups perform behaviors, we tend to better remember information 
that confirms our stereotypes than we remember information that 
disconfirms our stereotypes (Fyock & Stangor, 1994). If we believe 
that women are bad drivers and we see a woman driving poorly, 
then we tend to remember it, but when we see a woman who drives 
particularly well, we tend to forget it. This is of course another 
example of the general principle of assimilation—we tend to 
perceive the world in ways that make it fit our existing beliefs more 
easily than we change our beliefs to fit the reality around us. 

And stereotypes become difficult to change because they are 
so important to us—they become an integral and important part 
of our everyday lives in our culture. Stereotypes are frequently 
expressed on TV, in movies, and in chat rooms and blogs, and we 
learn a lot of our beliefs from these sources. Our friends also tend 
to hold beliefs similar to ours, and we talk about these beliefs when 
we get together with them (Schaller & Conway, 1999). In short, 
stereotypes and prejudice are powerful largely because they are 
important social norms that are part of our culture (Guimond, 
2000). 

Because they are so highly cognitively accessible, and because 
they seem so “right,” our stereotypes easily influence our judgments 
of and responses to those we have categorized. The social 
psychologist John Bargh once described stereotypes as “cognitive 
monsters” because their activation was so powerful and because the 
activated beliefs had such insidious influences on social judgment 
(Bargh, 1999). Making things even more difficult, stereotypes are 
strongest for the people who are in most need of change—the 
people who are most prejudiced (Lepore & Brown, 1997). 

Because stereotypes and prejudice often operate out of our 
awareness, and also because people are frequently unwilling to 
admit that they hold them, social psychologists have developed 
methods for assessing them indirectly. In the next section we will 
consider two of these approaches—the 
bogus pipeline 
procedure 
and the 
Implicit Association Test (IAT). 

Research Focus 

Measuring Stereotypes Indirectly 


One difficulty in measuring stereotypes and prejudice is 
that people may not tell the truth about their beliefs. Most 
people do not want to admit—either to themselves or to 
others—that they hold stereotypes or that they are 
prejudiced toward some social groups. To get around this 
problem, social psychologists make use of a number of 
techniques that help them measure these beliefs more 
subtly and indirectly. 

One indirect approach to assessing prejudice is called 
the 
bogus pipeline procedure 
(Jones & Sigall, 1971). In this 
procedure, the experimenter first convinces the 
participants that he or he has access to their “true” beliefs, 
for instance, by getting access to a questionnaire that they 
completed at a prior experimental session. Once the 
participants are convinced that the researcher is able to 
assess their “true” attitudes, it is expected that they will be 
more honest in answering the rest of the questions they are 
asked because they want to be sure that the researcher 
does not catch them lying. The bogus pipeline procedure 
suggests that people may frequently mask their negative 
beliefs in public—people express more prejudice when they 
are in the bogus pipeline than they do when they are asked 
the same questions more directly. 

Other indirect measures of prejudice are also frequently 
used in social psychological research, for 
instance—assessing nonverbal behaviors such as speech 
errors or physical closeness. One common measure 
involves asking participants to take a seat on a chair near a 
person from a different racial or ethnic group and 
measuring how far away the person sits (Sechrist & Stangor, 
2001; Word, Zanna, & Cooper, 1974). People who sit farther 


away are assumed to be more prejudiced toward the 
members of the group. 

Because our stereotypes are activated spontaneously 
when we think about members of different social groups, it 
is possible to use reaction-time measures to assess this 
activation and thus to learn about people’s stereotypes and 
prejudices. In these procedures, participants are asked to 
make a series of judgments about pictures or descriptions 
of social groups and then to answer questions as quickly as 
they can, but without making mistakes. The speed of these 
responses is used to determine an individual’s stereotypes 
or prejudice. 

The most popular reaction-time implicit measure of 
prejudice—the 
Implicit Association Test (IAT)—is frequently 
used to assess stereotypes and prejudice (Nosek, 
Greenwald, & Banaji, 2007). In the IAT, participants are 
asked to classify stimuli that they view on a computer 
screen into one of two categories by pressing one of two 
computer keys, one with their left hand and one with their 
right hand. Furthermore, the categories are arranged such 
that the responses to be answered with the left and right 
buttons either “fit with” (match) the stereotype or do not 
“fit with” (mismatch) the stereotype. For instance, in one 
version of the IAT, participants are shown pictures of men 
and women and also shown words related to gender 
stereotypes (e.g., 
strong, leader, 
or 
powerful 
for men 
and 
nurturing, emotional, 
or 
weak 
for women). Then the 
participants categorize the photos (“Is this picture a picture 
of a man or a woman?”) and answer questions about the 
stereotypes (“Is this the word 
strong?) by pressing either 
the Yes button or the No button using either their left hand 
or their right hand. 


When the responses are arranged on the screen in a 
“matching” way, such that the male category and the 
“strong” category are on the same side of the screen (e.g., 
on the right side), participants can do the task very quickly 
and they make few mistakes. It’s just easier, because the 
stereotypes are matched or associated with the pictures in 
a way that makes sense. But when the images are arranged 
such that the women and the strong categories are on the 
same side, whereas the men and the weak categories are on 
the other side, most participants make more errors and 
respond more slowly. The basic assumption is that if two 
concepts are associated or linked, they will be responded to 
more quickly if they are classified using the same, rather 
than different, keys. 

Implicit association procedures such as the IAT show that 
even participants who claim that they are not prejudiced do 
seem to hold cultural stereotypes about social groups. Even 
Black people themselves respond more quickly to positive 
words that are associated with White rather than Black 
faces on the IAT, suggesting that they have subtle racial 
prejudice toward Blacks. 

Because they hold these beliefs, it is possible—although 
not guaranteed—that they may use them when responding 
to other people, creating a subtle and unconscious type of 
discrimination. Although the meaning of the IAT has been 
debated (Tetlock & Mitchell, 2008), research using implicit 
measures does suggest that—whether we know it or not, 
and even though we may try to control them when we 
can—our stereotypes and prejudices are easily activated 
when we see members of different social categories 
(Barden, Maddux, Petty, & Brewer, 2004). 


Do you hold implicit prejudices? Try the IAT yourself, 
here: 
https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit 

Although in some cases the stereotypes that are used to make 
judgments might actually be true of the individual being judged, in 
many other cases they are not. Stereotyping is problematic when 
the stereotypes we hold about a social group are inaccurate overall, 
and particularly when they do not apply to the individual who is 
being judged (Stangor, 1995). Stereotyping others is simply unfair. 
Even if many women are more emotional than are most men, not all 
are, and it is not right to judge any one woman as if she is. 

In the end, stereotypes become self-fulfilling prophecies, such 
that our expectations about the group members make the 
stereotypes come true (Snyder, Tanke, & Berscheid, 1977; Word, 
Zanna, & Cooper, 1974). Once we believe that men make better 
leaders than women, we tend to behave toward men in ways that 
makes it easier for them to lead. And we behave toward women 
in ways that makes it more difficult for them to lead. The result? 
Men find it easier to excel in leadership positions, whereas women 
have to work hard to overcome the false beliefs about their lack 
of leadership abilities (Phelan & Rudman, 2010). And self-fulfilling 
prophecies are ubiquitous—even teachers’ expectations about their 
students’ academic abilities can influence the students’ school 
performance (Jussim, Robustelli, & Cain, 2009). 

Of course, you may think that you personally do not behave in 
these ways, and you may not. But research has found that 
stereotypes are often used out of our awareness, which makes it 
very difficult for us to correct for them. Even when we think we are 
being completely fair, we may nevertheless be using our stereotypes 
to condone discrimination (Chen & Bargh, 1999). And when we are 
distracted or under time pressure, these tendencies become even 
more powerful (Stangor & Duan, 1991). 

Furthermore, attempting to prevent our stereotype from coloring 


our reactions to others takes effort. We experience more negative 
affect (particularly anxiety) when we are with members of other 
groups than we do when we are with people from our own groups, 
and we need to use more cognitive resources to control our 
behavior because of our anxiety about revealing our stereotypes or 
prejudices (Butz & Plant, 2006; Richeson & Shelton, 2003). When 
we know that we need to control our expectations so that we do 
not unintentionally stereotype the other person, we may try to 
do so—but doing so takes effort and may frequently fail (Macrae, 
Bodenhausen, Milne, & Jetten, 1994). 

Social Psychology in the Public Interest 

Stereotype Threat 

Our stereotypes influence not only our judgments of 
others but also our beliefs about ourselves, and even our 
own performance on important tasks. In some cases, these 
beliefs may be positive, and they have the effect of making 
us feel more confident and thus better able to perform 
tasks. Because Asian students are aware of the stereotype 
that “Asians are good at math,” reminding them of this fact 
before they take a difficult math test can improve their 
performance on the test (Walton & Cohen, 2003). On the 
other hand, sometimes these beliefs are negative, and they 
create negative self-fulfilling prophecies such that we 
perform more poorly just because of our knowledge about 
the stereotypes. 

One of the long-standing puzzles in the area of academic 
performance concerns why Black students perform more 
poorly on standardized tests, receive lower grades, and are 


less likely to remain in school in comparison with White 
students, even when other factors such as family income, 
parents’ education, and other relevant variables are 
controlled. Claude Steele and Joshua Aronson (1995) tested 
the hypothesis that these differences might be due to the 
activation of negative stereotypes. Because Black students 
are aware of the (inaccurate) stereotype that “Blacks are 
intellectually inferior to Whites,” this stereotype might 
create a negative expectation, which might interfere with 
their performance on intellectual tests through fear of 
confirming that stereotype. 

In support of this hypothesis, Steele and Aronson’s 
research revealed that Black college students performed 
worse (in comparison with their prior test scores) on math 
questions taken from the Graduate Record Examination 
(GRE) when the test was described to them as being 
“diagnostic of their mathematical ability” (and thus when 
the stereotype was relevant) but that their performance 
was not influenced when the same questions were framed 
as “an exercise in problem solving.” And in another study, 
Steele and Aronson found that when Black students were 
asked to indicate their race before they took a math test 
(again activating the stereotype), they performed more 
poorly than they had on prior exams, whereas the scores of 
White students were not affected by first indicating their 
race. 

Steele and Aronson argued that thinking about negative 
stereotypes that are relevant to a task that one is 
performing creates stereotype threat—performance 
decrements that are caused by the knowledge of cultural 
stereotypes. That is, they argued that the negative impact of 
race on standardized tests may be caused, at least in part, 


by the performance situation itself. Because the threat is “in 
the air,” Black students may be negatively influenced by it. 

Research has found that the experience of stereotype 
threat can help explain a wide variety of performance 
decrements among those who are targeted by negative 
stereotypes. For instance, when a math task is described as 
diagnostic of intelligence, Latinos and particularly Latinas 
perform more poorly than do Whites (Gonzales, Blanton, & 
Williams, 2002). Similarly, when stereotypes are activated, 
children with low socioeconomic status perform more 
poorly in math than do those with high socioeconomic 
status, and psychology students perform more poorly than 
do natural science students (Brown, Croizet, Bohner, 
Fournet, & Payne, 2003). Even groups who typically enjoy 
advantaged social status can be made to experience 
stereotype threat. White men performed more poorly on a 
math test when they were told that their performance 
would be compared with that of Asian men (Aronson, 
Lustina, Good, Keough, & Steele, 1999), and Whites 
performed more poorly than Blacks on a sport-related task 
when it was described to them as measuring their natural 
athletic ability (Stone, 2002). 

Stereotype threat is created in situations that pose a 
significant threat to self-concern, such that our 
perceptions of ourselves as important, valuable, and 
capable individuals are threatened. In these situations, 
there is a discrepancy between our positive concept of our 
skills and abilities and the negative stereotypes suggesting 
poor performance. When our stereotypes lead us to be 
believe that we are likely to perform poorly on a task, we 
experience a feeling of unease and status threat. 

Research has found that stereotype threat is caused by 


both cognitive and affective factors. On the cognitive side, 
individuals who are experiencing stereotype threat show an 
impairment in cognitive processing that is caused by 
increased vigilance toward the environment and attempts 
to suppress their stereotypical thoughts. On the affective 
side, stereotype threat creates stress as well as a variety of 
affective responses including anxiety (Schmader, Johns, & 
Forbes, 2008). 

Stereotype threat is not, however, absolute—we can get 
past it if we try. What is important is to reduce the self-
concern that is engaged when we consider the relevant 
negative stereotypes. Manipulations that affirm positive 
characteristics about oneself or one’s group are successful 
at reducing stereotype threat (Alter, Aronson, Darley, 
Rodriguez, & Ruble, 2010; Greenberg et al., 2003; McIntyre, 
Paulson, & Lord, 2003). In fact, just knowing that stereotype 
threat exists and may influence performance can help 
alleviate its negative impact (Johns, Schmader, & Martens, 
2005). 


End-of-Chapter Summary 

Key Takeaways 

Beliefs about the characteristics of the groups and 
the members of those groups are known as 
stereotypes. 
Prejudice refers to an unjustifiable negative 
attitude toward an outgroup. 
Stereotypes and prejudice may create 
discrimination. 
Stereotyping and prejudice begin from social 
categorization—the natural cognitive process by 
which we place individuals into social groups. 
Social categorization influences our perceptions of 
groups—for instance, the perception of outgroup 
homogeneity. 
Once our stereotypes and prejudices become 
established, they are difficult to change and may lead 
to self-fulfilling prophecies, such that our 
expectations about the group members make the 
stereotypes come true. 
Stereotypes may influence our performance on 
important tasks through stereotype threat. 



Exercises and Critical Thinking 

1. Look again at the pictures in 
Figure 12.2, and 
consider your thoughts and feelings about each 
person. What are your stereotypes and prejudices 
about them? Do you think your stereotypes are 
accurate? 
2. On which (if any) social categories do you 
categorize others? Why do you (or don’t you) 
categorize? Is your behavior fair or unfair to the 
people you are categorizing? 
3. Think of a task that one of the social groups to 
which you belong is considered to be particularly 
good (or poor) at. Do you think the cultural 
stereotypes about your group have ever influenced 
your performance on a task? 


References 

Aboud, F. E., & Doyle, A.-B. (1996). Parental and peer influences 
on children’s racial attitudes. 
International Journal of Intercultural 
Relations, 20, 371–383. 

Allport, G. W. (1954/1979). 
The nature of prejudice. New York, NY: 
Doubleday. 

Alter, A. L., Aronson, J., Darley, J. M., Rodriguez, C., & Ruble, D. 


N. (2010). Rising to the threat: Reducing stereotype threat by 
reframing the threat as a challenge. 
Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 46(1), 166–171. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2009.09.014. 

Aronson, J., Lustina, M. J., Good, C., Keough, K., & Steele, C. M. (1999). 
When White men can’t do math: Necessary and sufficient factors 
in stereotype threat. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 
29–24. 

Barden, J., Maddux, W. W., Petty, R. E., & Brewer, M. B. (2004). 
Contextual moderation of racial bias: The impact of social roles 
on controlled and automatically activated attitudes. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 
87(1), 5–22. 

Bargh, J. (Ed.). (1999). 
The cognitive monster: The case against the 
controllability of automatic stereotype effects. 
New York, NY: 
Guilford Press. 

Bigler, R. S., & Liben, L. S. (2006). A developmental intergroup theory 
of social stereotypes and prejudice. In R. V. Kail (Ed.), 
Advances in 
child development and behavior 
(Vol. 34, pp. 39–89). San Diego, CA: 
Elsevier. 

Brown, R. (1995). 
Prejudice: Its social psychology. Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell. 

Brown, R., Croizet, J.-C., Bohner, G., Fournet, M., & Payne, A. (2003). 
Automatic category activation and social behaviour: The 
moderating role of prejudiced beliefs. 
Social Cognition, 21(3), 
167–193. 

Butz, D. A., & Plant, E. A. (2006). Perceiving outgroup members 
as unresponsive: Implications for approach-related emotions, 
intentions, and behavior. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 91(6), 1066–1079. 

Chen, M., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). Consequences of automatic 
evaluation: Immediate behavioral predispositions to approach or 
avoid the stimulus. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
25(2), 215–224. 

Crisp, R. J., & Hewstone, M. (Eds.). (2007). 
Multiple social 
categorization. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press. 

Eagly, A. H., & Steffen, V. J. (1984). Gender stereotypes stem from 


the distribution of women and men into social roles. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 46(4), 735–754. 

Fiske, A. P., Haslam, N., & Fiske, S. T. (1991). Confusing one person 
with another: What errors reveal about the elementary forms of 
social relations. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(5), 
656–674. 

Fyock, J., & Stangor, C. (1994). The role of memory biases in 
stereotype maintenance. 
British Journal of Social Psychology, 
33(3), 331–343. 

Gonzales, P. M., Blanton, H., & Williams, K. J. (2002). The effects 
of stereotype threat and double-minority status on the test 
performance of Latino women. 
Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 28(5), 659–670. 

Greenberg, J., Martens, A., Jonas, E., Eisenstadt, D., Pyszczynski, 
T., & Solomon, S. (2003). Psychological defense in anticipation of 
anxiety: Eliminating the potential for anxiety eliminates the effect 
of mortality salience on worldview defense. 
Psychological Science, 
14(5), 516–519. 

Guimond, S. (2000). Group socialization and prejudice: The social 
transmission of intergroup attitudes and beliefs. 
European Journal 
of Social Psychology, 30(3), 335–354. 

Haslam, S. A., Oakes, P. J., & Turner, J. C. (1996). Social identity, 
self-categorization, and the perceived homogeneity of ingroups 
and outgroups: The interaction between social motivation and 
cognition. In 
Handbook of motivation and cognition: The 
interpersonal context 
(Vol. 3, pp. 182–222). New York, NY: The 
Guilford Press. 

Hirschfeld, L. (1996). 
Race in the making: Cognition, culture and the 
child’s construction of human kinds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Johns, M., Schmader, T., & Martens, A. (2005). Knowing is half the 
battle: Teaching stereotype threat as a means of improving 
women’s math performance. 
Psychological Science, 16(3), 175–179. 

Jones, E. E., & Sigall, H. (1971). The bogus pipeline: A new paradigm 
for measuring affect and attitude. 
Psychological Bulletin, 76(5), 
349–364. 


Judd, C. M., & Park, B. (1993). Definition and assessment of accuracy 
in social stereotypes. 
Psychological Review, 100(1), 109–128. 

Jussim, L., Robustelli, S. L., & Cain, T. R. (2009). Teacher expectations 
and self-fulfilling prophecies. In K. R. Wenzel & A. Wigfield 
(Eds.), 
Handbook of motivation at school 
(pp. 349–380). New York, 
NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group. 

Lee, Y. T., Jussim, L. J., & McCauley, C. R. (1995). 
Stereotype accuracy: 
Toward appreciating group differences. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Lepore, L., & Brown, R. (1997). Category and stereotype activation: Is 
prejudice inevitable? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
72(2), 275–287. 

Linville, P. W., & Jones, E. E. (1980). Polarized appraisals of out-
group members. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 
689–703. 

Linville, P. W., Salovey, P., & Fischer, G. W. (1986). Stereotyping and 
perceived distributions of social characteristics: An application to 
ingroup-outgroup perception. In J. F. Dovidio & S. L. Gaertner 
(Eds.), 
Prejudice, discrimination and racism 
(pp. 165–208). 
Orlando, FL: Academic Press. 

Lippman, W. (1922). 
Public opinion. New York, NY: Harcourt & Brace. 

Macrae, C. N., Bodenhausen, G. V., Milne, A. B., & Jetten, J. (1994). Out 
of mind but back in sight: Stereotypes on the rebound. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 67(5), 808–817. 

Madon, S., Guyll, M., Aboufadel, K., Montiel, E., Smith, A., Palumbo, 
P., & Jussim, L. (2001). Ethnic and national stereotypes: The 
Princeton trilogy revisited and revised. 
Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 27(8), 996–1010. doi: 10.1177/0146167201278007. 

McIntyre, R. B., Paulson, R. M., & Lord, C. G. (2003). Alleviating 
women’s mathematics stereotype threat through salience of 
group achievements. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
39(1), 83–90. 

Meissner, C. A., & Brigham, J. C. (2001). Thirty years of investigating 
the own-race bias in memory for faces: A meta-analytic 
review. 
Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 
7, 3–35. 


Nosek, B. A., Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (Eds.). (2007). 
The 
Implicit Association Test at age 7: A methodological and conceptual 
review. New York, NY: Psychology Press. 

Ostrom, T. M., & Sedikides, C. (1992). Out-group homogeneity 
effects in natural and minimal groups. 
Psychological Bulletin, 
112(3), 536–552. 

Phelan, J. E., & Rudman, L. A. (2010). Prejudice toward female leaders: 
Backlash effects and women’s impression management 
dilemma. 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 4(10), 
807–820. doi: 10.1111/j.1751–9004.2010.00306.x. 

Richeson, J. A., & Shelton, J. N. (2003). When prejudice does not pay: 
Effects of interracial contact on executive function. 
Psychological 
Science, 14(3), 287–290. 

Schaller, M., & Conway, G. (1999). Influence of impression-
management goals on the emerging content of group stereotypes: 
Support for a social-evolutionary perspective. 
Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 819–833. 

Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process 
model of stereotype threat effects on performance. 
Psychological 
Review, 115(2), 336–356. 

Sechrist, G. B., & Stangor, C. (2001). Perceived consensus influences 
intergroup behavior and stereotype accessibility. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 80(4), 645–654. 

Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., & Berscheid, E. (1977). Social perception 
and interpersonal behavior: On the self-fulfilling nature of social 
stereotypes. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(9), 
656–666. 

Stangor, C. (1995). Content and application inaccuracy in social 
stereotyping. In Y. T. Lee, L. J. Jussim, & C. R. McCauley 
(Eds.), 
Stereotype accuracy: Toward appreciating group 
differences 
(pp. 275–292). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Stangor, C., & Duan, C. (1991). Effects of multiple task demands 
upon memory for information about social groups. 
Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 27(4), 357–378. 


Stangor, C., Lynch, L., Duan, C., & Glass, B. (1992). Categorization 
of individuals on the basis of multiple social features. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 62(2), 207–218. 

Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the 
intellectual performance of African Americans. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 797–811. 

Stone, J. (2002). Battling doubt by avoiding practice: The effects 
of stereotype threat on self-handicapping in White 
athletes. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(12), 
1667–1678. 

Swim, J. K. (1994). Perceived versus meta-analytic effect sizes: An 
assessment of the accuracy of gender stereotypes. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 66(1), 21–36. 

Tajfel, H. (1970). Experiments in intergroup discrimination. 
Scientific 
American, 223, 
96–102. 

Tajfel, H., & Wilkes, A. L. (1963). Classification and quantitative 
judgment. 
British Journal of Psychology, 54, 101–114. 

Taylor, S. E., Fiske, S. T., Etcoff, N. L., & Ruderman, A. J. (1978). 
Categorical and contextual bases of person memory and 
stereotyping. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36(7), 
778–793. 

Tetlock, P. E., & Mitchell, G. (2008). Calibrating prejudice in 
milliseconds. 
Social Psychology Quarterly, 71(1), 12–16. 

Trope, Y., & Thompson, E. (1997). Looking for truth in all the wrong 
places? Asymmetric search of individuating information about 
stereotyped group members. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 73(2), 229–241. 

Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype lift. 
Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 39(5), 456–467. 

Word, C. O., Zanna, M. P., & Cooper, J. (1974). The nonverbal 
mediation of self-fulfilling prophecies in interracial 
interaction. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 10(2), 
109–120. 

Yzerbyt, V., Schadron, G., Leyens, J., & Rocher, S. (1994). Social 
judgeability: The impact of meta-informational cues on the use 


of stereotypes. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 
48–55. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 12.1 from Principles of Social Psychology by 
the University of Minnesota under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, 
except where otherwise noted. 


Chapter 6: In-group 
Favoritism & Prejudice 


Chapter 6 Learning Objectives 

Review the causes and outcomes of ingroup 
favoritism. 
Summarize the results of Henri Tajfel’s research on 
minimal groups. 
Outline the personality and cultural variables that 
influence ingroup favoritism. 


We have now seen that social categorization occurs whenever we 
think about others in terms of their category memberships rather 
than on the basis of other, more personal information about the 
individual. And we have seen that social categorization can have a 
variety of negative consequences for the people who are the targets 
of our stereotypes. But social categorization becomes even more 
important, and has even more powerful effects upon our reactions 
to others, when the categorization becomes more emotionally 
involving, and particularly when the categorization involves 
categorization into liked ingroups and potentially disliked 
outgroups (Amodio & Devine, 2006). 

Because our ancestors lived in small social groups that were 
frequently in conflict with other groups, it was evolutionarily 
functional for them to view members of other groups as different 
and potentially dangerous (Brewer & Caporael, 2006; Navarrete, 
Kurzban, Fessler, & Kirkpatrick, 2004). Differentiating between “us” 
and “them” probably helped keep us safe and free from disease, and 
as a result, the human brain became very efficient in making these 


distinctions (Mahajan et al., 2011; Phelps et al., 2000; Van Vugt & 
Schaller, 2008; Zaraté, Stoever, MacLin, & Arms-Chavez, 2008). The 
problem is that these naturally occurring tendencies may lead us to 
prefer people who are like us, and in some cases even to unfairly 
reject people from outgroups. 

Liking “Us” More Than “Them”: Ingroup 
Favoritism 

In his important research on group perceptions, Henri Tajfel and his 
colleagues (Tajfel, Billig, Bundy, & Flament, 1971) demonstrated how 
incredibly powerful the role of self-concern is in group perceptions. 
He found that just dividing people into arbitrary groups produces 
ingroup favoritism – the tendency to respond more positively to 
people from our ingroups than we do to people from outgroups. 

In Tajfel’s research, small groups of high school students came to 
his laboratory for a study supposedly concerning “artistic tastes.” 
The students were first shown a series of paintings by two 
contemporary artists, Paul Klee and Wassily Kandinsky. Supposedly 
on the basis of their preferences for each painting, the students 
were divided into two groups (they were called the X group and the 
Y group). Each boy was told which group he had been assigned to 
and that different boys were assigned to different groups. But none 
of them were told the group memberships of any of the other boys. 

The boys were then given a chance to allocate points to other 
boys in their own group and to boys in the other group (but never to 
themselves) using a series of payoff matrices, such as those shown 
in 
Figure 12.7 “Examples of Matrices Used in the Minimal Intergroup 
Studies of Tajfel and His Colleagues”. The charts divided a given 
number of rewards between two boys, and the boys thought that 
the rewards would be used to determine how much each boy would 
be paid for his participation. In some cases, the division was 
between two boys in the boy’s own group (the ingroup); in other 


cases, the division was between two boys who had been assigned to 
the other group (the outgroup); and in still other cases, the division 
was between a boy in the ingroup and a boy in the outgroup. Tajfel 
then examined the goals that the boys used when they divided up 
the points. 

Examples of Matrices Used in the Minimal Intergroup Studies of Tajfel and His Colleagues
Figure 12.7 
Examples of 
Matrices 
Used in the 
Minimal 
Intergroup 
Studies of 
Tajfel and 
His 
Colleagues 
From Tajfel 
(1970). 

A comparison of the boys’ choices in the different matrices showed 
that they allocated points between two boys in the ingroup or 
between two boys in the outgroup in an essentially fair way, so 
that each boy got the same amount. However, fairness was not 
the predominant approach when dividing points between ingroup 
and outgroup. In this case, rather than exhibiting fairness, the boys 
displayed ingroup favoritism, such that they gave more points to 
other members of their own group in relationship to boys in the 
other group. For instance, the boys might assign 8 points to the 
ingroup boy and only 3 points to the outgroup boy, even though 
the matrix also contained a choice in which they could give the 
ingroup and the outgroup boys 13 points each. In short, the boys 
preferred to maximize the gains of the other boys in their own 
group in comparison with the boys in the outgroup, even if doing 
so meant giving their own group members fewer points than they 
could otherwise have received. 

Perhaps the most striking part of Tajfel’s results is that ingroup 



favoritism was found to occur on the basis of such arbitrary and 
unimportant groupings. In fact, ingroup favoritism occurs even 
when the assignment to groups is on such trivial things as whether 
people “overestimate” or “underestimate” the number of dots shown 
on a display, or on the basis of a completely random coin toss (Billig 
& Tajfel, 1973; Locksley, Ortiz, & Hepburn, 1980). Tajfel’s research, 
as well other research demonstrating ingroup favoritism, provides 
a powerful demonstration of a very important social psychological 
process: Groups exist simply because individuals perceive those 
groups as existing. Even in a case where there really is no group (at 
least no meaningful group in any real sense), we still perceive groups 
and still demonstrate ingroup favoritism. 

The Outcomes of Ingroup Favoritism 

The tendency to favor their ingroup develops quickly in young 
children, beginning at the age of 3 years and increasing up to about 
6 years of age, and almost immediately begins to influence their 
behavior (Aboud, 2003; Aboud & Amato, 2001). Young children show 
greater liking for peers of their own sex and race and typically play 
with same-sex others after the age of 3. And there is a norm that we 
should favor our ingroups: People like people who express ingroup 
favoritism better than those who are more egalitarian (Castelli & 
Carraro, 2010). Ingroup favoritism is found for many different types 
of social groups, in many different settings, on many different 
dimensions, and in many different cultures (Bennett et al., 2004; 
Pinter & Greenwald, 2011). Ingroup favoritism also occurs on trait 
ratings, such that ingroup members are rated as having more 
positive characteristics than are outgroup members (Hewstone, 
1990). People also take credit for the successes of other ingroup 
members, remember more positive than negative information about 
ingroups, are more critical of the performance of outgroup than 


of ingroup members, and believe that their own groups are less 
prejudiced than are outgroups (Shelton & Richeson, 2005). 

People also talk differently about their ingroups than their 
outgroups, such that they describe the ingroup and its members 
as having broad positive traits (“We are 
generous 
and 
friendly”) but 
describe negative ingroup behaviors in terms of the specific 
behaviors of single group members (“Our group member, Bill, hit 
someone”) (Maass & Arcuri, 1996; Maass, Ceccarielli, & Rudin, 1996; 
von Hippel, Sekaquaptewa, & Vargas, 1997). These actions allow us 
to spread positive characteristics to all members of our ingroup 
but reserve negative aspects for individual group members, thereby 
protecting the group’s image. 

People 
also make trait attributions in ways that benefit their 
ingroups, just as they make trait attributions that benefit themselves. 
This general tendency, known as the ultimate attribution error, 
results in the tendency for each of the competing groups to 
perceive the other group extremely and unrealistically negatively 
(Hewstone, 1990). When an ingroup member engages in a positive 
behavior, we tend to see it as a stable internal characteristic of 
the group as a whole. Similarly, negative behaviors on the part of 
the outgroup are seen as caused by stable negative group 
characteristics. On the other hand, negative behaviors from the 
ingroup and positive behaviors from the outgroup are more likely to 
be seen as caused by temporary situational variables or by behaviors 
of specific individuals and are less likely to be attributed to the 
group. 

Ingroup Favoritism Has Many Causes 

Ingroup favoritism has a number of causes. For one, it is a natural 
part of social categorization—we categorize into ingroups and 
outgroups because it helps us simplify and structure our 
environment. It is easy, and perhaps even natural, to believe in the 


simple idea that “we are better than they are.” People who report 
that they have strong needs for simplifying their environments also 
show more ingroup favoritism (Stangor & Leary, 2006). 

Ingroup favoritism also occurs at least in part because we belong 
to the ingroup and not the outgroup (Cadinu & Rothbart, 1996). 
We like people who are similar to ourselves, and we perceive other 
ingroup members as similar to us. This also leads us to favor other 
members of our ingroup, particularly when we can clearly 
differentiate them from members of outgroups. We may also prefer 
ingroups because they are more familiar to us (Zebrowitz, Bronstad, 
& Lee, 2007). 

But the most important determinant of ingroup favoritism is 
simple self-enhancement. We want to feel good about ourselves, 
and seeing our ingroups positively helps us do so (Brewer, 1979). 
Being a member of a group that has positive characteristics provides 
us with the feelings of social identity – the positive self-esteem that 
we get from our group memberships. When we can identify ourselves 
as a member of a meaningful social group (even if it is a relatively 
trivial one), we can feel better about ourselves. 

We are particularly likely to show ingroup favoritism when we are 
threatened or otherwise worried about our self-concept (Maner et 
al., 2005; Solomon, Greenberg, & Pyszczynski, 2000). And people 
express higher self-esteem after they have been given the 
opportunity to derogate outgroups, suggesting that ingroup 
favoritism does make us feel good (Lemyre & Smith, 1985; Rubin & 
Hewstone, 1998). Furthermore, when individuals feel that the value 
of their ingroup is being threatened, they respond as if they are 
trying to regain their own self-worth—by expressing more positive 
attitudes toward ingroups and more negative attitudes toward 
outgroups (Branscombe, Wann, Noel, & Coleman, 1993; Spears, 
Doosje, & Ellemers, 1997). Fein and Spencer (1997) found that 
participants expressed less prejudice after they had been given the 
opportunity to affirm and make salient an important and positive 
part of their own self-concept. In short, when our group seems to 
be good, we feel good; when our group seems to be bad, we feel bad. 


In some cases, we may be able to feel good about our group 
memberships even when our own individual outcomes are not so 
positive. Schmitt, Silvia, and Branscombe (2000) had groups of 
female college students perform a creativity task and then gave 
them feedback indicating that although they themselves had 
performed very poorly, another woman in their group had 
performed very well. Furthermore, in some experimental 
conditions, the women were told that the research was comparing 
the scores of men and women (which was designed to increase 
categorization by gender). In these conditions, rather than being 
saddened by the upward comparison with the other woman, 
participants used the successful performance of the other woman 
to feel good about themselves, as women. 

When Ingroup Favoritism Does Not Occur 

Although people have a general tendency to show ingroup 
favoritism, there are least some cases in which it does not occur. 
One situation in which ingroup favoritism is unlikely is when the 
members of the ingroup are clearly inferior to other groups on an 
important dimension. The players on a baseball team that has not 
won a single game all season are unlikely to be able to feel very 
good about themselves as a team and are pretty much forced to 
concede that the outgroups are better, at least as far as playing 
baseball is concerned. Members of low-status groups show less 
ingroup favoritism than do members of high-status groups and may 
even display outgroup favoritism, in which they admit that the other 
groups are better than they are (Clark & Clark, 1947). 

Another case in which people judge other members of the ingroup 
very negatively occurs when a member of one’s own group behaves 
in a way that threatens the positive image of the ingroup. A student 
who behaves in a way unbecoming to university students, or a 
teammate who does not seem to value the importance of the team, 


is disparaged by the other group members, often more than the 
same behavior from an outgroup member would be. 
The strong 
devaluation of ingroup members who threaten the positive image and 
identity of the ingroup is known as the black sheep effect. 

Personality and Cultural Determinants of 
Ingroup Favoritism 

To this point, we have considered ingroup favoritism as a natural 
part of everyday life. Because the tendency to favor the ingroup 
is a normal byproduct of self-concern, most people do, by and 
large, prefer their ingroups over outgroups. And yet not everyone 
is equally ingroup-favoring in all situations. There are a number 
of individual difference measures that predict prejudice, and these 
differences become particularly likely to show up under 
circumstances in which the desire to protect the self becomes 
important (Guimond, Dambrun, Michinov, & Duarte, 2003). 

Some people are more likely than others to show ingroup 
favoritism because they are particularly likely to rely on their group 
memberships to create a positive social identity. These differences 
in group identification can be measured through self-report 
measures such as the Collective Self-Esteem Scale (Luhtanen & 
Crocker, 1992). The scale assesses the extent to which the individual 
values his or her memberships in groups in public and private ways, 
as well as the extent to which he or she gains social identity from 
those groups. People who score higher on the scale show more 
ingroup favoritism in comparison with those who score lower on it 
(Stangor & Thompson, 2002). The scale, from Luhtanen and Crocker 
(1992), is shown in 
Table 12.2 “The Collective Self-Esteem Scale”. 

Table 12.2 
The Collective Self-Esteem Scale 


Membership 
I am a worthy member of the social groups I belong to. 
I feel I don’t have much to offer to the social groups I 
belong to [R]. 
I am a cooperative participant in the social groups I 
belong to. 
I often feel I’m an unclean member of my social group [R]. 
Private 
I often regret that I belong to some of the social groups I 
do [R]. 
In general, I’m glad to be a member of the social groups I 
belong to. 
Overall, I often feel that the social groups of which I am a 
member are not worthwhile [R]. 
I feel good about the social groups I belong to. 
Public 
Overall, my social groups are considered good by others. 
Most people consider my social groups, on the average, to 
be more ineffective than other social groups [R]. 
In general, others respect the social groups that I am a 
member of. 
In general, others think that the social groups I am a 
member of are unworthy [R]. 
Identity 
Overall, my group memberships have very little to do with 
how I feel about myself [R]. 
The social groups I belong to are an important reflection 
of who I am. 
The social groups I belong to are unimportant in my sense 
of what kind of a person I am [R]. 
In general, belonging to social groups is an important part 
of my self-image. 
[R] = Item is reversed before scoring. 

Another personality dimension that relates to the desires to protect 
and enhance the self and the ingroup and thus also relates to 
greater ingroup favoritism, and in some cases prejudice toward 
outgroups, is the personality dimension of authoritarianism 
(Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswik, Levinson, & Sanford, 1950; Altemeyer, 
1988). 
Authoritarianism 
is 
a personality dimension that characterizes 
people who prefer things to be simple rather than complex and who 


tend to hold traditional and conventional values. Authoritarians are 
ingroup-favoring in part because they have a need to self-enhance 
and in part because they prefer simplicity and thus find it easy to 
think simply: “We are all good and they are all less good.” Political 
conservatives tend to show more ingroup favoritism than do 
political liberals, perhaps because the former are more concerned 
with protecting the ingroup from threats posed by others (Jost, 
Glaser, Kruglanski, & Sulloway, 2003; Stangor & Leary, 2006). 

People with strong goals toward other-concern display less 
ingroup favoritism and less prejudice. People who view it as 
particularly important to connect with and respect other 
people—those who are more focused on tolerance and fairness 
toward others—are less ingroup-favoring and more positive toward 
the members of groups other than their own. The desire to be 
fair and to accept others can be assessed by individual difference 
measures such as desire to control one’s prejudice (Plant & Devine, 
1998) and humanism (Katz & Hass, 1988). 

Social dominance orientation (SDO) is a personality variable that 
refers to the tendency to see and to accept inequality among different 
groups 
(Pratto, Sidanius, Stallworth, & Malle, 1995). People who 
score high on measures of SDO believe that there are and should be 
status differences among social groups, and they do not see these as 
wrong. High SDO individuals agree with statements such as “Some 
groups of people are simply inferior to other groups,” “In getting 
what you want, it is sometimes necessary to use force against other 
groups,” and “It’s OK if some groups have more of a chance in life 
than others.” Those who are low on SDO, on the other hand, believe 
that all groups are relatively equal in status and tend to disagree 
with these statements. People who score higher on SDO also show 
greater ingroup favoritism. 

Stereotyping and prejudice also varies across cultures. Spencer-
Rodgers, Williams, Hamilton, Peng, and Wang (2007) tested the 
hypothesis that Chinese participants, because of their collectivist 
orientation, would find social groups more important than would 
Americans (who are more individualistic) and that as a result, they 


would be more likely to infer personality traits on the basis of group 
membership—that is, to stereotype. Supporting the hypothesis, they 
found that Chinese participants made stronger stereotypical trait 
inferences than Americans did on the basis of a target’s membership 
in a fictitious group. 

End-of-Chapter Summary 

Key Takeaways 

Ingroup favoritism is a fundamental and 
evolutionarily functional aspect of human perception, 
and it occurs even in groups that are not particularly 
meaningful. 
Ingroup favoritism is caused by a variety of 
variables, but particularly important is self-concern: 
We experience positive social identity as a result of 
our membership in valued social groups. 
Ingroup favoritism develops early in children and 
influences our behavior toward ingroup and outgroup 
members in a variety of ways. 
Personality dimensions that relate to ingroup 
favoritism include authoritarianism and social 
dominance orientation—dimensions that relate to less 
ingroup favoritism include a desire to control one’s 



prejudice and humanism. 
There are at least some cultural differences in the 
tendency to show ingroup favoritism and to 
stereotype others. 


Exercises and Critical Thinking 

1. Consider some of the important social groups to 
which you belong. Do your group memberships lead 
to ingroup favoritism or even prejudice? 
2. Describe a time when the members of one of your 
important social groups behaved in a way that 
increased group identity (e.g., showing the black 
sheep effect). What was the outcome of the actions? 


References 

Aboud, F. E. (2003). The formation of in-group favoritism and out-
group prejudice in young children: Are they distinct 
attitudes? 
Developmental Psychology, 39(1), 48–60. 

Aboud, F. E., & Amato, M. (2001). Developmental and socialization 
influences on intergroup bias. In R. Brown & S. Gaertner 


(Eds.), 
Blackwell handbook in social psychology 
(Vol. 4, pp. 65–85). 
New York, NY: Blackwell. 

Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D. J., & Sanford, R. N. 
(1950). 
The authoritarian personality. New York, NY: Harper. 

Altemeyer, B. (1988). 
Enemies of freedom: Understanding right-wing 
authoritarianism. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Amodio, D. M., & Devine, P. G. (2006). Stereotyping and evaluation 
in implicit race bias: Evidence for independent constructs and 
unique effects on behavior. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 
91, 652–661. 

Bennett, M., Barrett, M., Karakozov, R., Kipiani, G., Lyons, E., 
Pavlenko, V.…Riazanova., T. (2004). Young children’s evaluations 
of the ingroup and of outgroups: A multi-national study. 
Social 
Development, 13(1), 124–141. doi: 10.1046/j.1467–9507.2004.00260.x. 

Billig, M., & Tajfel, H. (1973). Social categorization and similarity 
in intergroup behavior. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 3, 
27–52. 

Branscombe, N. R., Wann, D. L., Noel, J. G., & Coleman, J. (1993). 
In-group or out-group extremity: Importance of the threatened 
social identity. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 
381–388. 

Brewer, M. B. (1979). In-group bias in the minimal intergroup 
situation: A cognitive-motivational analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 
86, 307–324. 

Brewer, M. B., & Caporael, L. R. (2006). An evolutionary perspective 
on social identity: Revisiting groups. In M. Schaller, J. A. Simpson, 
& D. T. Kenrick (Eds.), 
Evolution and social psychology 
(pp. 143–161). 
New York, NY: Psychology Press. 

Cadinu, M. R., & Rothbart, M. (1996). Self-anchoring and 
differentiation processes in the minimal group setting. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 70(4), 661–677. 

Castelli, L., & Carraro, L. (2010). Striving for difference: On the 
spontaneous preference for ingroup members who maximize 
ingroup positive distinctiveness. 
European Journal of Social 
Psychology, 40(6), 881–890. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.740. 


Clark, K., & Clark, M. (1947). Racial identification and preference 
in Negro children. In E. Maccoby, T. Newcomb, & E. Hartley 
(Eds.), 
Readings in social psychology 
(pp. 602–611). New York, NY: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 

Fein, S., & Spencer, S. J. (1997). Prejudice as self-image maintenance: 
Affirming the self through derogating others. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 31–44. 

Guimond, S., Dambrun, M., Michinov, N., & Duarte, S. (2003). Does 
social dominance generate prejudice? Integrating individual and 
contextual determinants of intergroup cognitions. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 84(4), 697–721. doi: 10.1037/
0022–3514.84.4.697. 

Hewstone, M. (1990). The “ultimate attribution error”? A review of 
the literature on intergroup causal attribution. 
European Journal 
of Social Psychology, 20(4), 311–335. 

Jost, J. T., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A. W., & Sulloway, F. J. (2003). 
Political conservatism as motivated social cognition. 
Psychological 
Bulletin, 129(3), 339–375. 

Katz, I., & Hass, R. G. (1988). Racial ambivalence and American value 
conflict: Correlational and priming studies of dual cognitive 
structures. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 
893–905. 

Lemyre, L., & Smith, P. M. (1985). Intergroup discrimination and self-
esteem in the minimal group paradigm. 
Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 49, 660–670. 

Locksley, A., Ortiz, V., & Hepburn, C. (1980). Social categorization 
and discriminatory behavior: Extinguishing the minimal 
intergroup discrimination effect. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 39(5), 773–783. doi: 10.1037/0022–3514.39.5.773. 

Luhtanen, R., & Crocker, J. (1992). A collective self-esteem scale: 
Self-evaluation of one’s social identity. 
Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 18, 302–318. 

Maass, A., & Arcuri, L. (1996). Language and stereotyping. In C. N. 
Macrae, C. Stangor, & M. Hewstone (Eds.), 
Stereotypes and 
stereotyping 
(pp. 193–226). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 


Maass, A., Ceccarielli, R., & Rudin, S. (1996). Linguistic intergroup 
bias: Evidence for in-group-protective motivation. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 71(3), 512–526. 

Mahajan, N., Martinez, M. A., Gutierrez, N. L., Diesendruck, G., 
Banaji, M. R., & Santos, L. R. (2011). The evolution of intergroup 
bias: Perceptions and attitudes in rhesus macaques. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 100(3), 387–405. doi: 10.1037/
a0022459. 

Maner, J. K., Kenrick, D. T., Becker, D. V., Robertson, T. E., Hofer, 
B., Neuberg, S. L., & Schaller, M. (2005). Functional projection: 
How fundamentally social motives can bias interpersonal 
perception. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 
63–75. 

Navarrete, C. D., Kurzban, R., Fessler, D. M. T., & Kirkpatrick, L. 
A. (2004). Anxiety and intergroup bias: Terror management or 
coalitional psychology? 
Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 
7(4), 370–397. 

Phelps, E. A., O’Connor, K. J., Cunningham, W. A., Funayama, E. S., 
Gatenby, J. C., Gore, J. C.…Banaji, M. R. (2000). Performance on 
indirect measures of race evaluation predicts amygdala 
activation. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12(5), 729–738. 

Pinter, B., & Greenwald, A. G. (2011). A comparison of minimal group 
induction procedures. 
Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 
14(1), 81–98. doi: 10.1177/1368430210375251. 

Plant, E. A., & Devine, P. G. (1998). Internal and external motivation 
to respond without prejudice. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 75(3), 811–832. 

Pratto, F., Sidanius, J., Stallworth, L. M., & Malle, B. F. (1995). Social 
dominance orientation: A personality variable predicting social 
and political attitudes. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 67, 741–763. 

Rubin, M., & Hewstone, M. (1998). Social identity theory’s self-
esteem hypothesis: A review and some suggestions for 
clarification. 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2, 40–62. 

Schmitt, M. T., Silvia, P. J., & Branscombe, N. R. (2000). The 
intersection of self-evaluation maintenance and social identity 


theories: Intragroup judgment in interpersonal and intergroup 
contexts. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26(12), 
1598–1606. 

Shelton, J. N., & Richeson, J. A. (2005). Intergroup contact and 
pluralistic ignorance. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
88(1), 91–107. 

Solomon, S., Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (2000). Pride and 
prejudice: Fear of death and social behavior. 
Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 9(6), 200–204. 

Spears, R., Doosje, B., & Ellemers, N. (1997). Self-stereotyping in 
the face of threats to group status and distinctiveness: The role 
of group identification. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
23, 538–553. 

Spencer-Rodgers, J., Williams, M. J., Hamilton, D. L., Peng, K., & 
Wang, L. (2007). Culture and group perception: Dispositional and 
stereotypic inferences about novel and national groups. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 93(4), 525–543. 

Stangor, C., & Leary, S. (2006). Intergroup beliefs: Investigations 
from the social side. 
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 
38, 243–283. 

Stangor, C., & Thompson, E. P. (2002). Needs for cognitive economy 
and self-enhancement as unique predictors of intergroup 
attitudes. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 32(4), 563–575. 
doi: 10.1002/ejsp.114. 

Tajfel, H. (1970). Experiments in intergroup discrimination. 
Scientific 
American, 223, 96–102. 

Tajfel, H., Billig, M., Bundy, R., & Flament, C. (1971). Social 
categorization and intergroup behavior. 
European Journal of 
Social Psychology, 1, 149–178. 

Van Vugt, M., & Schaller, M. (2008). Evolutionary approaches to 
group dynamics: An introduction. 
Group Dynamics: Theory, 
Research, and Practice, 12(1), 1–6. 

von Hippel, W., Sekaquaptewa, D., & Vargas, P. (1997). The linguistic 
intergroup bias as an implicit indicator of prejudice. 
Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 33(5), 490–509. 


Zaraté, M. A., Stoever, C. J., MacLin, M. K., & Arms-Chavez, C. J. 
(2008). Neurocognitive underpinnings of face perception: Further 
evidence of distinct person and group perception 
processes. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(1), 
108–115. 

Zebrowitz, L. A., Bronstad, P. M., & Lee, H. K. (2007). The 
contribution of face familiarity to ingroup favoritism and 
stereotyping. 
Social Cognition, 25(2), 306–338. doi: 10.1521/
soco.2007.25.2.306 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 12.2 from Principles of Social Psychology 
by the University of Minnesota under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, 
except where otherwise noted. 


Chapter 7: Reducing 
Discrimination 

Chapter 7 Learning Objectives 

Review the causes of discrimination and the ways 
that we can reduce it. 
Summarize the conditions under which intergroup 
contact does or does not reduce prejudice and 
discrimination. 


We have seen that social categorization is a basic part of human 
nature and one that helps us to simplify our social worlds, to draw 
quick (if potentially inaccurate) conclusions about others, and to 
feel good about ourselves. In many cases, our preferences for 
ingroups may be relatively harmless—we may prefer to socialize 
with people who share our race or ethnicity, for instance, but 
without particularly disliking the others. But categorizing others 
may also lead to prejudice and discrimination, and it may even do so 
without our awareness. Because prejudice and discrimination are so 
harmful to so many people, we must all work to get beyond them. 

Discrimination influences the daily life of its victims in areas such 
as employment, income, financial opportunities, housing and 
educational opportunities, and medical care. Discrimination has 
been blamed for the large percentage of Blacks living in poverty 


and for their lack of access to high-paying jobs (Williams & Rucker, 
1996). Blacks have higher mortality rates than Whites for 8 of the 
10 leading causes of death in the United States (Williams, 1999) and 
have less access to and receive poorer-quality health care, even 
controlling for other variables such as level of health insurance. 
Suicide rates among lesbians and gays are substantially higher than 
rates for the general population, and it has been argued that this in 
part due to the negative outcomes of prejudice, including negative 
attitudes and resulting social isolation (Halpert, 2002). And in some 
rare cases, discrimination even takes the form of hate crimes such 
as gay bashing. 

More commonly, members of minority groups also face a variety 
of small hassles, such as bad service in restaurants, being stared 
at, and being the target of jokes (Swim, Hyers, Cohen, Fitzgerald, 
& Bylsma, 2003). But even these everyday “minor” forms of 
discrimination can be problematic because they may produce anger 
and anxiety among stigmatized group members and may lead to 
stress and other psychological problems (Klonoff, Landrine, & 
Campbell, 2000; Klonoff, Landrine, & Ullman, 1999). Stigmatized 
individuals who report experiencing more exposure to 
discrimination or other forms of unfair treatment also report more 
depression, anger, and anxiety and lower levels of life satisfaction 
and happiness (Swim, Hyers, Cohen, & Ferguson, 2001). 

Of course most of us do try to keep our stereotypes and our 
prejudices out of mind, and we work hard to avoid discriminating 
(Richeson & Shelton, 2007). But even when we work to keep our 
negative beliefs under control, this does not mean that they easily 
disappear. Neil Macrae and his colleagues (Macrae, Bodenhausen, 
Milne, & Jetten, 1994) asked British college students to write a 
paragraph describing a skinhead (a member of a group that is 
negatively stereotyped in England). One half of the participants 
were asked to be sure to not use their stereotypes when they were 
judging him, whereas the other half simply wrote whatever came to 
mind. Although the participants who were asked to suppress their 
thoughts were able to do it, this suppression didn’t last very long. 


After they had suppressed their stereotypes, these beliefs quickly 
popped back into mind, making it even more likely that they would 
be used immediately later. 

But stereotypes are not always and inevitably activated when we 
encounter people from other groups. We can and we do get past 
them, although doing so may take some effort on our part (Blair, 
2002). There are a number of techniques that we can use to try 
to improve our attitudes toward outgroups, and at least some of 
them have been found to be effective. Kawakami, Dovidio, Moll, 
Hermsen, and Russin (2000) found that students who practiced 
responding in nonstereotypical ways to members of other groups 
became better able to avoid activating their negative stereotypes 
on future occasions. And a number of studies have found that we 
become less prejudiced when we are exposed to and think about 
group members who have particularly positive or nonstereotypical 
characteristics. For instance, Blair, Ma, and Lenton (2001) asked 
their participants to imagine a woman who was “strong” and found 
that doing so decreased stereotyping of women. Similarly, 
Bodenhausen, Schwarz, Bless, and Wanke (1995) found that when 
White students thought about positive Black role models—such as 
Oprah Winfrey and Michael Jordan—they became less prejudiced 
toward Blacks. 

Reducing Discrimination by Changing Social 
Norms 

One variable that makes us less prejudiced is education. People 
who are more educated express fewer stereotypes and prejudice 
in general. This is true for students who enroll in courses that are 
related to stereotypes and prejudice, such as a course on gender 
and ethnic diversity (Rudman, Ashmore, & Gary, 2001), and is also 
true more generally—education reduces prejudice, regardless of 
what particular courses you take (Sidanius, Sinclair, & Pratto, 2006). 


The effects of education on reducing prejudice are probably due 
in large part to the new social norms that people are introduced 
to in school. Social norms define what is appropriate and 
inappropriate, and we can effectively change stereotypes and 
prejudice by changing the relevant norms about them. Jetten, 
Spears, and Manstead (1997) manipulated whether students thought 
that the other members of their university favored equal treatment 
of others or believed that others thought it was appropriate to 
favor the ingroup. They found that perceptions of what the other 
group members believed had an important influence on the beliefs 
of the individuals themselves. The students were more likely to 
show ingroup favoritism when they believed that the norm of their 
ingroup was to do so, and this tendency was increased for students 
who had high social identification with the ingroup. 

Sechrist and Stangor (2001) selected White college students who 
were either high or low in prejudice toward Blacks and then 
provided them with information indicating that their prejudiced or 
unprejudiced beliefs were either shared or not shared by the other 
students at their university. Then the students were asked to take a 
seat in a hallway to wait for the next part of the experiment. A Black 
confederate was sitting in one seat at the end of the row, and the 
dependent measure was how far away the students sat from her. 

As you can see in 
Figure 12.8 “The Role of Norms in Intergroup 
Behavior”, high prejudice students who learned that other students 
were also prejudiced sat farther away from the Black confederate in 
comparison with high prejudice individuals who were led to believe 
that their beliefs were not shared. On the other hand, students 
who were initially low in prejudice and who believed these views 
were shared sat closer to the Black confederate in comparison with 
low prejudice individuals who were led to believe that their beliefs 
were not shared. These results demonstrate that our perceptions of 
relevant social norms can strengthen or weaken our tendencies to 
engage in discriminatory behaviors. 


The Role of Norms in Intergroup Behavior
Figure 
12.8 
The Role 
of Norms in 
Intergroup 
Behavior 

White college students who were low in prejudice toward Blacks sat 
closer to the Black confederate when they had been told that their 
beliefs were shared with other group members at their university. 
On the other hand, White college students who were high in 
prejudice sat farther away from the Black confederate when they 
had been told that their beliefs were shared with other group 
members at their university. Data are from Sechrist and Stangor 
(2001). 

The influence of social norms is powerful, and long-lasting changes 
in beliefs about outgroups will occur only if they are supported 
by changes in social norms. Prejudice and discrimination thrive in 
environments in which they are perceived to be the norm, but they 
die when the existing social norms do not allow it. And because 
social norms are so important, the behavior of individuals can help 
create or reduce prejudice and discrimination. Discrimination, 
prejudice, and even hate crimes such as gay bashing will be more 
likely to continue if people do not respond to or confront them 
when they occur. 

What this means is that if you believe that prejudice is wrong, 
you must confront it when you see it happening. Czopp, Monteith, 
and Mark (2006) had White participants participate in a task in 
which it was easy to unintentionally stereotype a Black person, and 
as a result, many of the participants did so. Then, confederates of 
the experimenter confronted the students about their stereotypes, 
saying things such as “Maybe it would be good to think about Blacks 



in other ways that are a little more fair?” or “It just seems that 
you sound like some kind of racist to me. You know what I mean?” 
Although the participants who had been confronted experienced 
negative feelings about the confrontation and also expressed 
negative opinions about the person who confronted them, the 
confrontation did work. The students who had been confronted 
expressed less prejudice and fewer stereotypes on subsequent tasks 
than did the students who had not been confronted. 

As this study concluded, taking steps to reduce prejudice is 
everyone’s duty—having a little courage can go a long way in this 
regard. Confronting prejudice can lead other people to think that 
we are complaining and therefore to dislike us (Kaiser & Miller, 
2001; Shelton & Stewart, 2004), but confronting prejudice is not all 
negative for the person who confronts. Although it is embarrassing 
to do so, particularly if we are not completely sure that the behavior 
was in fact prejudice, when we fail to confront, we may frequently 
later feel guilty that we did not (Shelton, Richeson, Salvatore, & Hill, 
2006). 

Reducing Prejudice Through Intergroup Contact 

One of the reasons that people may hold stereotypes and prejudices 
is that they view the members of outgroups as different from them. 
We may become concerned that our interactions with people from 
different racial groups will be unpleasant, and these anxieties may 
lead us to avoid interacting with people from those groups (Mallett, 
Wilson, & Gilbert, 2008). What this suggests is that a good way to 
reduce prejudice is to help people create closer connections with 
members of different groups. People will be more favorable toward 
others when they learn to see those other people as more similar to 
them, as closer to the self, and to be more concerned about them. 

The idea that intergroup contact will reduce prejudice, known as 
the 
contact hypothesis, is simple: If children from different ethnic 


groups play together in school, their attitudes toward each other 
should improve. And if we encourage college students to travel 
abroad, they will meet people from other cultures and become more 
positive toward them. 

One important example of the use of intergroup contact to 
influence prejudice came about as a result of the important U.S. 
Supreme Court case 
Brown v. Board of Education 
in 1954. In this 
case, the Supreme Court agreed, based in large part on the 
testimony of psychologists, that busing Black children to schools 
attended primarily by White children, and vice versa, would 
produce positive outcomes on intergroup attitudes, not only 
because it would provide Black children with access to better 
schools, but also because the resulting intergroup contact would 
reduce prejudice between Black and White children. This strategy 
seemed particularly appropriate at the time it was implemented 
because most schools in the United States then were highly 
segregated by race. 

The strategy of busing was initiated after the Supreme Court 
decision, and it had a profound effect on schools in the United 
States. For one, the policy was very effective in changing school 
makeup—the number of segregated schools decreased dramatically 
during the 1960s after the policy was begun. Busing also improved 
the educational and occupational achievement of Blacks and 
increased the desire of Blacks to interact with Whites, for instance, 
by forming cross-race friendships (Stephan, 1999). Overall, then, 
the case of desegregating schools in the United States supports 
the expectation that intergroup contact, at least in the long run, 
can be successful in changing attitudes. Nevertheless, as a result 
of several subsequent U.S. Supreme Court decisions, the policy of 
desegregating schools via busing was not continued past the 1990s. 

Although student busing to achieve desegregated schools 
represents one prominent example of intergroup contact, such 
contact occurs in many other areas as well. Taken together, there 
is substantial support for the effectiveness of intergroup contact in 
improving group attitudes in a wide variety of situations, including 


schools, work organizations, military forces, and public housing. 
Pettigrew and Tropp (2006) conducted a meta-analysis in which 
they reviewed over 500 studies that had investigated the effects of 
intergroup contact on group attitudes. They found that attitudes 
toward groups that were in contact became more positive over 
time. Furthermore, positive effects of contact were found on both 
stereotypes and prejudice and for many different types of contacted 
groups. 

The positive effects of intergroup contact may be due in part to 
increases in other-concern. Galinsky and Moskowitz (2000) found 
that leading students to take the perspective of another group 
member—which increased empathy and closeness to the 
person—also reduced prejudice. And the behavior of students on 
college campuses demonstrates the importance of connecting with 
others and the dangers of not doing so. Sidanius, Van Laar, Levin, 
and Sinclair (2004) found that students who joined exclusive 
campus groups, including fraternities, sororities, and minority 
ethnic organizations (such as the African Student Union), were more 
prejudiced to begin with and became even less connected and more 
intolerant of members of other social groups over the time that they 
remained in the organizations. It appears that memberships in these 
groups focused the students on themselves and other people who 
were very similar to them, leading them to become less tolerant of 
others who are different. 

Although intergroup contact does work, it is not a panacea 
because the conditions necessary for it to be successful are 
frequently not met. Contact can be expected to work only in 
situations that create the appropriate opportunities for change. For 
one, contact will only be effective if it provides information 
demonstrating that the existing stereotypes held by the individuals 
are incorrect. When we learn more about groups that we didn’t 
know much about before, we learn more of the truth about them, 
leading us to be less biased in our beliefs. But if our interactions 
with the group members do not allow us to learn new beliefs, then 
contact cannot work. 


When we first meet someone from another category, we are likely 
to rely almost exclusively on our stereotypes (Brodt & Ross, 1998). 
However, when we get to know the individual well (e.g., as a student 
in a classroom learns to know the other students over a school year), 
we may get to the point where we ignore that individual’s group 
membership almost completely, responding to him or her entirely 
at the individual level (Madon et al., 1998). Thus contact is effective 
in part because it leads us to get past our perceptions of others as 
group members and to individuate them. 

When we get past group memberships and focus more on the 
individuals in the groups, we begin to see that there is a great 
deal of variability among the group members and that our global 
and undifferentiating group stereotypes are actually not that 
informative (Rothbart & John, 1985). Successful intergroup contact 
tends to reduce the perception of outgroup homogeneity. Contact 
also helps us feel more positively about the members of the other 
group, and this positive affect makes us like them more. 

Intergroup contact is also more successful when the people 
involved in the contact are motivated to learn about the others. 
One factor that increases this motivation is 
interdependence—a state 
in which the group members depend on each other for successful 
performance of the group goals (Neuberg & Fiske, 1987). The 
importance of interdependence can be seen in the success of 
cooperative learning techniques, such as the 
jigsaw 
classroom 
(Aronson, Blaney, Stephan, Sikes, & Snapp, 1978; Aronson, 
2004). 

The 
jigsaw classroom 
is an approach 
to learning in which students 
from different racial or ethnic groups work together, in an 
interdependent way, to master material. The class is divided into 
small learning groups, where each group is diverse in ethnic and 
gender composition. The assigned material to be learned is divided 
into as many parts as there are students in the group, and members 
of different groups who are assigned the same task meet together 
to help develop a strong report. Each student then learns his or her 
own part of the material and presents this piece of the puzzle to 


the other members of his or her group. The students in each group 
are therefore interdependent in learning all the material. A wide 
variety of techniques, based on principles of the jigsaw classroom, 
are in use in many schools around the United States and the world, 
and research studying these approaches has found that cooperative, 
interdependent experiences among students from different social 
groups are effective in reducing negative stereotyping and prejudice 
(Stephan, 1999). 

In sum, we can say that contact will be most effective when 
it is easier to get to know, and become more respectful of, the 
members of the other group and when the social norms of the 
situation promote equal, fair treatment of all groups. If the groups 
are treated unequally, for instance, by a teacher or leader who is 
prejudiced and who therefore treats the different groups differently, 
or if the groups are in competition rather than cooperation, there 
will be no benefit. In cases when these conditions are not met, 
contact may not be effective and may in fact increase prejudice, 
particularly when it confirms stereotypical expectations (Stangor, 
Jonas, Stroebe, & Hewstone, 1996). Finally, it is important that 
enough time be allowed for the changes to take effect. In the case 
of busing in the United States, for instance, the positive effects 
of contact seemed to have been occurring, but they were not 
happening particularly fast. 

Let’s consider in the next section still another way that intergroup 
contact can reduce prejudice—the idea that prejudice can be 
reduced for people who have friends who are friends with members 
of the outgroup—the 
extended-contact hypothesis. 

Research Focus 

The Extended-Contact Hypothesis 


Although the contact hypothesis proposes that direct 
contact between people from different social groups will 
produce more positive attitudes between them, recent 
evidence suggests that 
prejudice can also be reduced for 
people who have friends who are friends with members of the 
outgroup, even if the individual does not have direct contact 
with the outgroup members himself or herself. This 
hypothesis is known as the 
extended-contact hypothesis. 
Supporting this prediction, Wright, Aron, McLaughlin-
Volpe, and Ropp (1997) found in two correlational studies 
that college students who reported that their own friends 
had friends who were from another ethnic group reported 
more positive attitudes toward that outgroup than did 
students who did not have any friends who had outgroup 
friends, even controlling for the participants’ own outgroup 
friendships. 

Wright et al. (1997) also tested the extended-contact 
hypothesis experimentally. Participants were four groups of 
14 students, and each group spent a whole day in the lab. 
On arrival, 7 participants were assigned to the “green” 
group, and 7 to the “blue” group, supposedly on the basis of 
similar interests. To create strong ingroup identity and to 
produce competition between the groups, the group 
members wore blue and green t-shirts and engaged in a 
series of competitive tasks. Participants then expressed 
their initial thoughts and feelings about the outgroup and 
its members. 

Then, supposedly as part of an entirely different study, 
one participant was randomly selected from each group, 
and the two were taken to a separate room in which they 
engaged in a relationship-building task that has been 
shown to quickly create feelings of friendship between two 


strangers. Then the two members from each team were 
then reunited with their original groups, where they were 
encouraged to describe their experience with the other 
group member in the friendship-building task. 

In the final phase, the groups then engaged in another 
competitive task, and participants rated their thoughts and 
feelings about the outgroup and its members again. As you 
can see in the following figure, and supporting the 
extended-contact hypothesis, results showed that the 
participants (including those who did not participate in the 
closeness task themselves) were more positive toward the 
outgroup after than before the two team members had met. 
This study, as well as many other studies, supports the 
importance of cross-group friendships in promoting 
favorable outgroup attitudes (Page-Gould, Mendoza-
Denton, & Tropp, 2008; Shook & Fazio, 2008). 

This figure shows how members of the two groups, which were in competition with each other, rated each other before and after the experimental manipulation of friendship.
Figure 
12.9 
The 
Extended-
Contact 
Hypothesis 

This figure shows how members of the two groups, 
which were in competition with each other, rated each 
other before and after the experimental manipulation of 
friendship. You can see that group relationships, which 
were becoming more negative, changed to being more 
positive after the intervention. Data are from Wright, Aron, 
McLaughlin-Volpe, and Ropp (1997). 



Moving Others Closer to Us: The Benefits of 
Recategorization 

The research on intergroup contact suggests that although contact 
may improve prejudice, it may make it worse if it is not implemented 
correctly. Improvement is likely only when the contact moves the 
members of the groups to feel that they are closer to each other 
rather than further away from each other. In short, groups are 
going to have better attitudes toward each other when they see 
themselves more similarly to each other—when they feel more like 
one large group than a set of smaller groups. 

This fact was demonstrated in a very convincing way in one of the 
most well known of all social psychological studies. In the “Robbers’ 
Cave Experiment,” Sherif, Harvey, White, Hood, and Sherif (1961) 
studied the group behavior of 11-year-old boys at a summer camp. 
Although the boys did not know it, the researchers carefully 
observed the behaviors of the children during the camp session, 
with the goal of learning about how group conflict developed and 
how it might be resolved among the children. 

During the first week of the camp, the boys were divided into 
two groups that camped at two different campsites. During this 
time, friendly relationships developed among the boys within each 
of the two groups. Each group developed its own social norms and 
group structure and became quite cohesive, with a strong positive 
social identity. The two groups chose names for themselves (the 
Rattlers and the Eagles), and each made their own group flag and 
participated in separate camp activities. 

At the end of this one-week baseline period, it was arranged 
that the two groups of boys would become aware of each other’s 
presence. Furthermore, the researchers worked to create 
conditions that led to increases in each group’s social identity and at 
the same time created negative perceptions of the other group. The 
researchers arranged baseball games, a tug-of-war, and a treasure 
hunt and offered prizes for the group that won the competitions. 


Almost immediately, this competition created ingroup favoritism 
and prejudice, and discrimination quickly followed. By the end of 
the second week, the Eagles had sneaked up to the Rattlers’ cabin 
and stolen their flag. When the Rattlers discovered the theft, they in 
turn raided the Eagles’ cabin, stealing things. There were food fights 
in the dining room, which was now shared by the groups, and the 
researchers documented a substantial increase in name-calling and 
stereotypes of the outgroup. Some fistfights even erupted between 
members of the different groups. 

The researchers then intervened by trying to move the groups 
closer to each other. They began this third stage of the research 
by setting up a series of situations in which the boys had to work 
together to solve a problem. These situations were designed to 
create interdependence by presenting the boys with 
superordinate 
goals—goals that were both very important to them and yet that 
required the cooperative efforts and resources of both the Eagles 
and the Rattlers to attain. These goals involved such things as the 
need to pool money across both groups in order to rent a movie 
that all the campers wanted to view, or the need to pull together on 
ropes to get a food truck that had become stuck back onto the road. 
As the children worked together to meet these goals, the negative 
perceptions of the group members gradually improved; there was 
a reduction of hostility between the groups and an emergence of 
more positive intergroup attitudes. 

This strategy was effective because it led the campers to perceive 
both the ingroup and the outgroup as one large group (“we”) rather 
than as two separate groups (“us” and “them”). As differentiation 
between the ingroup and the outgroup decreases, so should ingroup 
favoritism, prejudice, and conflict. The differences between the 
original groups are still present, but they are potentially 
counteracted by perceived similarities in the second superordinate 
group. 
The attempt to reduce prejudice by creating a superordinate 
categorization 
is known as the goal of creating a 
common ingroup 
identity 
(Gaertner & Dovidio, 2008), and we can diagram the 
relationship as follows: 


interdependence and cooperation → common ingroup identity → 
favorable intergroup attitudes. 

A substantial amount of research has supported the predictions of 
the common ingroup identity model. For instance, Samuel Gaertner 
and his colleagues (Gaertner, Mann, Murrell, & Dovidio, 1989) tested 
the hypothesis that interdependent cooperation in groups reduces 
negative beliefs about outgroup members because it leads people 
to see the others as part of the ingroup (by creating a common 
identity). In this research, college students were brought to a 
laboratory where they were each assigned to one of two teams of 
three members each, and each team was given a chance to create 
its own unique group identity by working together. Then, the two 
teams were brought into a single room to work on a problem. In one 
condition, the two teams were told to work together as a larger, six-
member team to solve the problem, whereas in the other condition, 
the two teams worked on the problem separately. 

Consistent with the expected positive results of creating a 
common group identity, the interdependence created in the 
condition where the teams worked together increased the tendency 
of the team members to see themselves as members of a single, 
larger team, and this in turn reduced the tendency for each group 
to show ingroup favoritism. 

But the benefits of recategorization are not confined to 
laboratory settings—they also appear in our everyday interactions 
with other people. Jason Neir and his colleagues (Neir et al., 2001) 
had Black and White interviewers approach White students who 
were attending a football game. The dependent measure was 
whether or not they agreed to help the interviewer by completing 
a questionnaire. However, the interviewers also wore hats 
representing either one of the two universities who were playing 
in the game. As you can see in 
Figure 12.10 “Recategorization and 
Helping Behavior”, the data were analyzed both by whether the 
interviewer and the student were of the same race (either both 
White or one White and one Black) and also by whether they wore 


hats from the same or different universities. As expected on the 
basis of recategorization and the common ingroup identity 
approach, the White students were significantly more likely to help 
the Black interviewers when they wore a hat of the same university 
as that worn by the interviewee. The hat evidently led the White 
students to recategorize the interviewer as part of the university 
ingroup, leading to more helping. However, whether the individuals 
shared university affiliation did not influence helping for the White 
participants, presumably because they already saw the interviewer 
as a member of the ingroup (the interviewer was also White). 

Recategorization and Helping Behavior
Figure 
12.10 
Recategorization 
and Helping 
Behavior 

In this field study, White and Black interviewers asked White 
students attending a football game to help them by completing a 
questionnaire. The data were analyzed both by whether the request 
was to a White (ingroup) or Black (outgroup) student and also by 
whether the individual whose help was sought wore the same hat 
that they did or a different hat. Results supported the common 
ingroup identity model. Helping was much greater for outgroup 
members when hats were the same. Data are from Neir et al. (2001). 

Again, the implications of these results are clear and powerful. If we 
want to improve attitudes among people, we must get them to see 
each other as more similar and less different. And even relatively 
simple ways of doing so, such as wearing a hat that suggests an 
ingroup identification, can be successful. 



End-of-Chapter Summary 

Key Takeaways 

Changing our stereotypes and prejudices is not 
easy, and attempting to suppress them may backfire. 
However, with appropriate effort, we can reduce our 
tendency to rely on our stereotypes and prejudices. 
One approach to changing stereotypes and 
prejudice is by changing social norms—for instance, 
through education and laws enforcing equality. 
Prejudice will change faster when it is confronted 
by people who see it occurring. Confronting prejudice 
may be embarrassing, but it also can make us feel that 
we have done the right thing. 
Intergroup attitudes will be improved when we can 
lead people to focus more on their connections with 
others. Intergroup contact, extended contact with 
others who share friends with outgroup members, 
and a common ingroup identity are all examples of 
this process. 



Exercises and Critical Thinking 

1. Does your college or university support efforts to 
increase intergroup contact? If so, do the efforts 
seem to be successful in reducing prejudice? 
2. Have you ever confronted or failed to confront a 
person who you thought was expressing prejudice or 
discriminating? Why did you confront (or not 
confront) that person, and how did doing so make 
you feel? 
3. Imagine you are a teacher in a classroom and you 
see that some children expressing prejudice or 
discrimination toward other children on the basis of 
their race. What techniques would you use to attempt 
to reduce these negative behaviors? 


References 

Aronson, E. (2004). Reducing hostility and building compassion: 
Lessons from the jigsaw classroom. In A. G. Miller (Ed.), 
The social 
psychology of good and evil 
(pp. 469–488). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press. 

Aronson, E., Blaney, N., Stephan, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, M. (1978). 
The 
jig-saw classroom. London, England: Sage . 


Blair, I. V. (2002). The malleability of automatic stereotypes and 
prejudice. 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6(3), 242–261. 

Blair, I. V., Ma, J. E., & Lenton, A. P. (2001). Imagining stereotypes 
away: The moderation of implicit stereotypes through mental 
imagery. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(5), 
828–841. 

Bodenhausen, G. V., Schwarz, N., Bless, H., & Wanke, M. (1995). 
Effects of atypical exemplars on racial beliefs: Enlightened racism 
or generalized appraisals? 
Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 31, 48–63. 

Brodt, S. E., & Ross, L. D. (1998). The role of stereotyping in 
overconfident social prediction. 
Social Cognition, 16, 225–252. 

Czopp, A. M., Monteith, M. J., & Mark, A. Y. (2006). Standing up 
for a change: Reducing bias through interpersonal 
confrontation. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90(5), 
784–803. 

Gaertner, S. L., & Dovidio, J. F. (Eds.). (2008). 
Addressing 
contemporary racism: The common ingroup identity model. New 
York, NY: Springer Science + Business Media. 

Gaertner, S. L., Mann, J., Murrell, A., & Dovidio, J. F. (1989). Reducing 
intergroup bias: The benefits of recategorization. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 57(2), 239–249. 

Galinsky, A. D., & Moskowitz, G. B. (2000). Perspective-taking: 
Decreasing stereotype expression, stereotype accessibility, and 
in-group favoritism. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
78(4), 708–724. 

Halpert, S. C. (2002). Suicidal behavior among gay male 
youth. 
Journal of Gay and Lesbian Psychotherapy, 6, 53–79. 

Jetten, J., Spears, R., & Manstead, A. S. R. (1997). Strength of 
identification and intergroup differentiation: The influence of 
group norms. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 27(5), 
603–609. 

Kaiser, C. R., & Miller, C. T. (2001). Stop complaining! The social costs 
of making attributions to discrimination. 
Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 27, 254–263. 


Kawakami, K., Dovidio, J. F., Moll, J., Hermsen, S., & Russin, A. (2000). 
Just say no (to stereotyping): Effects of training in the negation 
of stereotypic associations on stereotype activation. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology,78 
(5), 871–888. 

Klonoff, E. A., Landrine, H., & Campbell, R. (2000). Sexist 
discrimination may account for well-known gender differences in 
psychiatric symptoms. 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 24, 93–99. 

Klonoff, E. A., Landrine, H., & Ullman, J. B. (1999). Racial 
discrimination and psychiatric symptoms among blacks. 
Cultural 
Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 5(4), 329–339. 

Macrae, C. N., Bodenhausen, G. V., Milne, A. B., & Jetten, J. (1994). Out 
of mind but back in sight: Stereotypes on the rebound. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 67(5), 808–817. 

Madon, S., Jussim, L., Keiper, S., Eccles, J., Smith, A., & Palumbo, P. 
(1998). The accuracy and power of sex, social class, and ethnic 
stereotypes: A naturalistic study in person perception. 
Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24(12), 1304–1318. 

Mallett, R. K., Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2008). Expect the 
unexpected: Failure to anticipate similarities leads to an 
intergroup forecasting error. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 94(2), 265–277. doi: 10.1037/0022–3514.94.2.94.2.265. 

Neir, J. A., Gaertner, S. L., Dovidio, J. F., Banker, B. S., Ward, C. M., & 
Rust, C. R. (2001). Changing interracial evaluations and behavior: 
The effects of a common group identity. 
Group Processes and 
Intergroup Relations, 4, 299–316. 

Neuberg, S. L., & Fiske, S. T. (1987). Motivational influences on 
impression formation: Outcome dependency, accuracy-driven 
attention, and individuating processes. 
Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 53, 431–444. 

Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With 
a little help from my cross-group friend: Reducing anxiety in 
intergroup contexts through cross-group friendship. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 95(5), 1080–1094. doi: 10.1037/
0022–3514.95.5.1080. 

Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006). A meta-analytic test of 


intergroup contact theory. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 90(5), 751–783. 

Richeson, J. A., & Shelton, J. N. (2007). Negotiating interracial 
interactions: Costs, consequences, and possibilities. 
Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 16(6), 316–320. doi: 10.1111/
j.1467–8721.2007.00528.x. 

Rothbart, M., & John, O. P. (1985). Social categorization and 
behavioral episodes: A cognitive analysis of the effects of 
intergroup contact. 
Journal of Social Issues, 41, 81–104. 

Rudman, L. A., Ashmore, R. D., & Gary, M. L. (2001). “Unlearning” 
automatic biases: The malleability of implicit prejudice and 
stereotypes. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(5), 
856–868. 

Sechrist, G., & Stangor, C. (2001). Perceived consensus influences 
intergroup behavior and stereotype accessibility. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 80(4), 645–654. 

Shelton, J. N., Richeson, J. A., Salvatore, J., & Hill, D. M. (Eds.). 
(2006). 
Silence is not golden: The intrapersonal consequences of not 
confronting prejudice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Shelton, N. J., & Stewart, R. E. (2004). Confronting perpetrators 
of prejudice: The inhibitory effects of social costs. 
Psychology of 
Women Quarterly, 28, 215–222. 

Sherif, M., Harvey, O. J., White, B. J., Hood, W. R., & Sherif, C. 
(1961). 
Intergroup conflict and cooperation: The robbers’ cave 
experiment. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Shook, N. J., & Fazio, R. H. (2008). Interracial roommate 
relationships: An experimental field test of the contact 
hypothesis. 
Psychological Science, 19(7), 717–723. doi: 10.1111/
j.1467–9280.2008.02147.x. 

Sidanius, J., Sinclair, S., & Pratto, F. (2006). Social dominance 
orientation, gender, and increasing educational exposure. 
Journal 
of Applied Social Psychology, 36(7), 1640–1653. 

Sidanius, J., Van Laar, C., Levin, S., & Sinclair, S. (2004). Ethnic 
enclaves and the dynamics of social identity on the college 


campus: The good, the bad, and the ugly. 
Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 87(1), 96–110. 

Stangor, C., Jonas, K., Stroebe, W., & Hewstone, M. (1996). 
Development and change of national stereotypes and 
attitudes. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 663–675. 

Stephan, W. (1999). 
Reducing prejudice and stereotyping in schools. 
New York, NY: Teacher’s College Press. 

Swim, J. K., Hyers, L. L., Cohen, L. L., & Ferguson, M. J. (2001). 
Everyday sexism: Evidence for its incidence, nature, and 
psychological impact from three daily diary studies. 
Journal of 
Social Issues, 57(1), 31–53. 

Swim, J. K., Hyers, L. L., Cohen, L. L., Fitzgerald, D. C., & Bylsma, 
W. H. (2003). African American college students’ experiences with 
everyday racism: Characteristics of and responses to these 
incidents. 
Journal of Black Psychology, 29(1), 38–67. 

Williams, D. R. (1999). Race, socioeconomics status, and health: The 
added effect of racism and discrimination. In Adler, N. E., Boyce, 
T., Chesney, M. A., & Cohen, S. (1994). Socioeconomic status and 
health: The challenge of the gradient. 
American Psychologist, 49, 
15-24. 

Williams, D. R., & Rucker, T. (Eds.). (1996). 
Socioeconomic status and 
the health of racial minority populations. New York, NY: Plenum 
Press. 

Wright, S. C., Aron, A., McLaughlin-Volpe, T., & Ropp, S. A. (1997). The 
extended contact effect: Knowledge of cross-group friendships 
and prejudice. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(1), 
73–90. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 12.3 from Principles of Social Psychology 
by the University of Minnesota under the Creative Commons 


Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, 
except where otherwise noted. 


Chapter 8: Racial & Ethnic 
Inequality 

Chapter 8 Learning Objectives 

Describe the targets of nineteenth-century mob 
violence in U.S. cities. 
Discuss why the familiar saying “The more things 
change, the more they stay the same” applies to the 
history of race and ethnicity in the United States. 
Critique the biological concept of race. 
Discuss why race is a social construction. 
Explain why ethnic heritages have both good and 
bad consequences. 
Describe any two manifestations of racial and 
ethnic inequality in the United States. 
Explain how and why racial inequality takes a 
hidden toll on people of color. 
Provide two examples of white privilege. 
Understand cultural explanations for racial and 
ethnic inequality. 
Describe structural explanations for racial and 
ethnic inequality. 
Summary of the debate over affirmative action. 
Describe any three policies or practices that could 



reduce racial and ethnic inequality in the United 
States. 


Introduction 

Social Problems in the News 

“Anger, Shock over Cross Burning in Calif. 
Community,” the headline said. This cross burning took 
place next to a black woman’s home in Arroyo Grande, 
California, a small, wealthy town about 170 miles 
northwest of Los Angeles. The eleven-foot cross had 
recently been stolen from a nearby church. 

This hate crime shocked residents and led a group of 
local ministers to issue a public statement that said in 
part, “Burning crosses, swastikas on synagogue walls, 
hateful words on mosque doors are not pranks. They are 
hate crimes meant to frighten and intimidate.” The head 
of the group added, “We live in a beautiful area, but it’s 
only beautiful if every single person feels safe 
conducting their lives and living here.” 

Four people were arrested four months later for 
allegedly burning the cross and charged with arson, hate 


crime, terrorism, and conspiracy. Arroyo Grande’s 
mayor applauded the arrests and said in a statement, 
“Despite the fact that our city was shaken by this crime, 
it did provide an opportunity for us to become better 
educated on matters relating to diversity.” 

Sources: (Jablon, 2011; Lerner, 2011; Mann, 2011) 

Cross burnings like this one recall the Ku Klux Klan era between the 
1880s and 1960s, when white men dressed in white sheets and white 
hoods terrorized African Americans in the South and elsewhere and 
lynched more than 3,000 black men and women. Thankfully, that 
era is long gone, but as this news story reminds us, racial issues 
continue to trouble the United States. 

In the wake of the 1960s urban riots, the so-called Kerner 
Commission (Kerner Commission, 1968)11. 
Kerner Commission. (1968). 
Report of the National 
Advisory Commission on civil disorders. New York, NY: 
Bantam Books. 
appointed by President 
Lyndon Johnson to study the riots famously warned, “Our nation 
is moving toward two societies, one black, one white—separate and 
unequal.” The commission blamed white racism for the riots and 
urged the government to provide jobs and housing for African 
Americans and to take steps to end racial segregation. 

More than four decades later, racial inequality in the United States 
continues to exist and in many ways has worsened. Despite major 
advances by African Americans, Latinos, and other people of color 
during the past few decades, they continue to lag behind non-
Hispanic whites in education, income, health, and other social 
indicators. The faltering economy since 2008 has hit people of color 


especially hard, and the racial wealth gap is deeper now than it was 
just two decades ago. 

Why does racial and ethnic inequality exist? What forms does it 
take? What can be done about it? This chapter addresses all these 
questions. We shall see that, although racial and ethnic inequality 
has stained the United States since its beginnings, there is hope for 
the future as long as our nation understands the structural sources 
of this inequality and makes a concerted effort to reduce it. Later 
chapters in this book will continue to highlight various dimensions 
of racial and ethnic inequality. Immigration, a very relevant issue 
today for Latinos and Asians and the source of much political 
controversy, receives special attention in 
Chapter 15 “Population 
and the Environment”’s discussion of population problems. 

A Historical Prelude 

Race and ethnicity have torn at the fabric of American society ever 
since the time of Christopher Columbus when an estimated 1 million 
Native Americans populated the eventual United States. By 1900, 
their numbers had dwindled to about 240,000, as tens of thousands 
were killed by white settlers and US troops and countless others 
died from disease contracted from people with European 
backgrounds. Scholars say this mass killing of Native Americans 
amounted to genocide (Brown, 2009). 

African Americans also have a history of maltreatment that began 
during the colonial period, when Africans were forcibly transported 
from their homelands to be sold as slaves in the Americas. Slavery, 
of course, continued in the United States until the North’s victory 
in the Civil War ended it. African Americans outside the South were 
not slaves but were still victims of racial prejudice. During the 1830s, 
white mobs attacked free African Americans in cities throughout 
the nation, including Philadelphia, Cincinnati, Buffalo, and 
Pittsburgh. The mob violence stemmed from a “deep-seated racial 


prejudice…in which whites saw blacks as ‘something less than 
human’” (Brown, 1975) and continued well into the twentieth 
century, when white mobs attacked African Americans in several 
cities, with at least seven antiblack riots occurring in 1919 that left 
dozens dead. Meanwhile, an era of Jim Crow racism in the South led 
to the lynching of thousands of African Americans, segregation in all 
facets of life, and other kinds of abuses (Litwack, 2009). 

An African American man hanging from a noose. A victim of a lynching
During the 
era of Jim 
Crow racism 
in the South, 
several 
thousand 
African 
Americans 
were 
lynched. US 
Library of 
Congress – 
public 
domain. 

African Americans were not the only targets of native-born white 
mobs back then (Dinnerstein & Reimers, 2009). As immigrants from 
Ireland, Italy, Eastern Europe, Mexico, and Asia flooded into the 
United States during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, 
they, too, were beaten, denied jobs, and otherwise mistreated. 



During the 1850s, mobs beat and sometimes killed Catholics in cities 
such as Baltimore and New Orleans. During the 1870s, whites rioted 
against Chinese immigrants in cities in California and other states. 
Hundreds of Mexicans were attacked and/or lynched in California 
and Texas during this period. 

Nazi racism in the 1930s and 1940s helped awaken Americans to 
the evils of prejudice in their own country. Against this backdrop, a 
monumental two-volume work by Swedish social scientist Gunnar 
Myrdal (Myrdal, 1944) attracted much attention when it was 
published. The book, 
An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and 
Modern Democracy, documented the various forms of 
discrimination facing blacks back then. The “dilemma” referred to by 
the book’s title was the conflict between the American democratic 
ideals of egalitarianism and liberty and justice for all and the harsh 
reality of prejudice, discrimination, and lack of equal opportunity. 

The Kerner Commission’s 1968 report reminded the nation that 
little, if anything, had been done since Myrdal’s book to address this 
conflict. Sociologists and other social scientists have warned since 
then that the status of people of color has actually been worsening 
in many ways since this report was issued (Massey, 2007; Wilson, 
2009). Evidence of this status appears in the remainder of this 
chapter. 

The Meaning of Race and Ethnicity 

To begin our understanding of racial and ethnic inequality, we first 
need to understand what 
race 
and 
ethnicity 
mean. These terms may 
seem easy to define but are much more complex than their 
definitions suggest. 


Race 

Let’s start first with 
race, which refers to a category of people who 
share certain inherited physical characteristics, such as skin color, 
facial features, and stature. A key question about race is whether it is 
more of a biological category or a social category. Most people think 
of race in biological terms, and for more than three hundred years, 
or ever since white Europeans began colonizing nations filled with 
people of color, people have been identified as belonging to one race 
or another based on certain biological features. 

It is certainly easy to see that people in the United States and 
around the world differ physically in some obvious ways. The most 
noticeable difference is skin tone: Some groups of people have very 
dark skin, while others have very light skin. Other differences also 
exist. Some people have very curly hair, while others have very 
straight hair. Some have thin lips, while others have thick lips. Some 
groups of people tend to be relatively tall, while others tend to be 
relatively short. Using such physical differences as their criteria, 
scientists at one point identified as many as nine races: African, 
American Indian or Native American, Asian, Australian Aborigine, 
European (more commonly called “white”), Indian, Melanesian, 
Micronesian, and Polynesian (Smedley, 2007). 

Although people certainly do differ in these kinds of physical 
features, anthropologists, sociologists, and many biologists 
question the value of these categories and thus the value of the 
biological concept of race (Smedley, 2007). For one thing, we often 
see more physical differences 
within 
a race than 
between 
races. For 
example, some people we call “white” (or European), such as those 
with Scandinavian backgrounds, have very light skins, while others, 
such as those from some Eastern European backgrounds, have 
much darker skins. In fact, some “whites” have darker skin than 
some “blacks,” or African Americans. Some whites have very straight 
hair, while others have very curly hair; some have blonde hair and 
blue eyes, while others have dark hair and brown eyes. Because of 


interracial reproduction going back to the days of slavery, African 
Americans also differ in the darkness of their skin and in other 
physical characteristics. In fact, it is estimated that at least 30 
percent of African Americans have some white (i.e., European) 
ancestry and that at least 20 percent of whites have African or 
Native American ancestry. If clear racial differences ever existed 
hundreds or thousands of years ago (and many scientists doubt such 
differences ever existed), in today’s world these differences have 
become increasingly blurred. 

President Barack Obama
President 
Barack 
Obama had 
an African 
father and a 
white 
mother. 
Although his 
ancestry is 
equally black 
and white, 
Obama 
considers 
himself an 
African 
American, as 
do most 
Americans. 
In several 
Latin 
American 
nations, 
however, 
Obama 
would be 
considered 
white 
because of 
his white 
ancestry. 
Steve 
Jurvetson 
– 
Barak 
Obama on 
the Primary 
– CC BY 2.0. 



Another reason to question the biological concept of race is that 
an individual or a group of individuals is often assigned to a race 
arbitrarily. A century ago, for example, Irish, Italians, and Eastern 
European Jews who left their homelands were not regarded as white 
once they reached the United States but rather as a different, 
inferior (if unnamed) race (Painter, 2010). The belief in their 
inferiority helped justify the harsh treatment they suffered in their 
new country. Today, of course, we call people from all three 
backgrounds white or European. 

In this context, consider someone in the United States who has a 
white parent and a black parent. What race is this person? American 
society usually calls this person black or African American, and the 
person may adopt this identity (as does President Barack Obama, 
who had a white mother and African father). But where is the logic 
for doing so? This person, as well as President Obama, is as much 
white as black in terms of parental ancestry. 

Or consider someone with one white parent and another parent 
who is the child of one black parent and one white parent. This 
person thus has three white grandparents and one black 
grandparent. Even though this person’s ancestry is thus 75 percent 
white and 25 percent black, she or he is likely to be considered black 
in the United States and may well adopt this racial identity. This 
practice reflects the traditional 
one-drop rule 
in the United States 
that defines someone as black if she or he has at least one drop 
of 
black blood, and that was used in the antebellum South to keep 
the slave population as large as possible (Staples, 2005). Yet in many 
Latin American nations, this person would be considered white 
(see 
Note 3.7 “Lessons from Other Societies”). With such arbitrary 
designations, the race is more of a social category than a biological 
one. 


Lessons from Other Societies 

The Concept of Race in Brazil 

As the text discusses, race was long considered a fixed, 
biological category, but today it is now regarded as a social 
construction. The experience of Brazil provides very 
interesting comparative evidence for this more accurate 
way of thinking about race. 

When slaves were first brought to the Americas almost 
four hundred years ago, many more were taken to Brazil, 
where slavery was not abolished until 1888, than to the land 
that eventually became the United States. Brazil was then a 
colony of Portugal, and the Portuguese used Africans as 
slave labor. Just as in the United States, a good deal of 
interracial reproduction has occurred since those early 
days, much of it initially the result of the rape of women 
slaves by their owners, and Brazil over the centuries has 
had many more racial intermarriages than the United 
States. Also like the United States, then, much of Brazil’s 
population has multiracial ancestry. But in a significant 
departure from the United States, Brazil uses different 
criteria to consider the race to which a person belongs. 

Brazil uses the term 
preto, or 
black, for people whose 
ancestry is solely African. It also uses the term 
Branco, 
or 
white, to refer to people whose ancestry is both African 
and European. In contrast, as the text discusses, the United 
States commonly uses the term 
black 
or 
African 
American 
to refer to someone with even a small amount of 
African ancestry and 
white 
for someone who is thought to 


have solely European ancestry or at least “looks” white. If 
the United States were to follow Brazil’s practice of 
reserving the term 
black 
for someone whose ancestry is 
solely African and the term 
white 
for someone whose 
ancestry is both African and European, many of the 
Americans commonly called “black” would no longer be 
considered black and instead would be considered white. 

As sociologist Edward E. Telles (2006, p. 79) summarizes 
these differences, “[Blackness is differently understood in 
Brazil than in the United States. A person considered black 
in the United States is often not so in Brazil. Indeed, some 
U.S. blacks may be considered white in Brazil. Although the 
value given to blackness is similarly low [in both nations], 
who gets classified as black is not uniform.” The fact that 
someone can count on being considered “black” in one 
society and not “black” in another society underscores the 
idea that race is best considered a social construction 
rather than a biological category. 

Sources: 
Barrionuevo & Calmes, 2011; Klein & Luno, 2009; 
Telles, 2006 

A third reason to question the biological concept of race comes 
from the field of biology itself and more specifically from the studies 
of genetics and human evolution. Starting with genetics, people 
from different races are more than 99.9 percent the same in their 
DNA (Begley, 2008). To turn that around, less than 0.1 percent of 
all DNA in our bodies accounts for the physical differences among 
people that we associate with racial differences. In terms of DNA, 
then, people with different racial backgrounds are much, much 
more similar than dissimilar. 

Even if we acknowledge that people differ in the physical 
characteristics we associate with race, modern evolutionary 


evidence reminds us that we are all, really, of one human race. 
According to evolutionary theory, the human race began thousands 
and thousands of years ago in sub-Saharan Africa. As people 
migrated around the world over the millennia, natural selection 
took over. It favored dark skin for people living in hot, sunny 
climates (i.e., near the equator), because the heavy amounts of 
melanin that produce dark skin protect against severe sunburn, 
cancer, and other problems. By the same token, natural selection 
favored light skin for people who migrated farther from the equator 
to cooler, less sunny climates, because dark skins there would have 
interfered with the production of vitamin D (Stone & Lurquin, 2007). 
Evolutionary evidence thus reinforces the common humanity of 
people who differ in the rather superficial ways associated with 
their appearances: We are one human species composed of people 
who happen to look different. 

Race as a Social Construction 

The reasons for doubting the biological basis for racial categories 
suggest that race is more of a social category than a biological 
one. Another way to say this is that race is a 
social construction, 
a concept that has no objective reality but rather is what people 
decide it is (Berger & Luckmann, 1963). In this view, the race has no 
real existence other than what and how people think of it. 

This understanding of race is reflected in the problems, outlined 
earlier, in placing people with multiracial backgrounds into any one 
racial category. We have already mentioned the example of 
President Obama. As another example, golfer Tiger Woods was 
typically called an African American by the news media when he 
burst onto the golfing scene in the late 1990s, but in fact, his 
ancestry is one-half Asian (divided evenly between Chinese and 
Thai), one-quarter white, one-eighth Native American, and only 
one-eighth African American (Leland & Beals, 1997). 


Historical examples of attempts to place people in racial 
categories further underscore the social constructionism of race. 
In the South during the time of slavery, the skin tone of slaves 
lightened over the years as babies were born from the union, often 
in the form of rape, of slave owners and other whites with slaves. As 
it became difficult to tell who was “black” and who was not, many 
court battles over people’s racial identity occurred. People who 
were accused of having black ancestry would go to court to prove 
they were white in order to avoid enslavement or other problems 
(Staples, 1998). 

Although race is a social construction, it is also true that race has 
real consequences because people 
do perceive race as something 
real. Even though so little of DNA accounts for the physical 
differences we associate with racial differences, that low amount 
leads us not only to classify people into different races but also to 
treat them differently—and, more to the point, unequally—based on 
their classification. Yet modern evidence shows there is little if any, 
scientific basis for the racial classification that is the source of so 
much inequality. 

Ethnicity 

Because of the problems in the meaning of 
race, many social 
scientists prefer the term 
ethnicity 
in speaking of people of color 
and others with distinctive cultural heritages. In this 
context, 
ethnicity 
refers to the shared social, cultural, and historical 
experiences, stemming from common national or regional 
backgrounds, that make subgroups of a population different from 
one another. Similarly, an 
ethnic group 
is a subgroup of a population 
with a set of shared social, cultural, and historical experiences; with 
relatively distinctive beliefs, values, and behaviors; and with some 
sense of identity of belonging to the subgroup. So conceived, the 


terms 
ethnicity 
and 
ethnic group 
avoid the biological connotations 
of the terms 
race 
and 
racial group. 

At the same time, the importance we attach to ethnicity illustrates 
that it, too, is in many ways a social construction, and our ethnic 
membership thus has important consequences for how we are 
treated. In particular, history and current practice indicate that it is 
easy to become prejudiced against people with different ethnicities 
from our own. Much of the rest of this chapter looks at the prejudice 
and discrimination operating today in the United States against 
people whose ethnicity is not white and European. Around the 
world today, ethnic conflict continues to rear its ugly head. The 
1990s and 2000s were filled with ethnic cleansing and pitched 
battles among ethnic groups in Eastern Europe, Africa, and 
elsewhere. Our ethnic heritages shape us in many ways and fill 
many of us with pride, but they also are the source of much conflict, 
prejudice, and even hatred, as the hate crime story that began this 
chapter so sadly reminds us. 

Dimensions of Racial and Ethnic Inequality 

Racial and ethnic inequality manifests itself in all walks of life. The 
individual and institutional discrimination just discussed is one 
manifestation of this inequality. We can also see stark evidence 
of racial and ethnic inequality in various government statistics. 
Sometimes statistics lie, and sometimes they provide all too true a 
picture; statistics on racial and ethnic inequality fall into the latter 
category. 
Table 3.2 “Selected Indicators of Racial and Ethnic 
Inequality in the United States” 
presents data on racial and ethnic 
differences in income, education, and health. 

Table 3.2 
Selected Indicators of Racial and Ethnic Inequality in the 
United States 


White African 
American Latino Asian Native 
American 
Median family 
income, 2010 ($) 68,818 39,900 41,102 76,736 39,664 
Persons who are 
college educated, 
2010 (%) 
30.3 19.8 13.9 52.4 14.9 
(2008) 
Persons in 
poverty, 2010 (%) 
9.9 
(non-Latino) 27.4 26.6 12.1 28.4 
Infant mortality 
(number of infant 
deaths per 1,000 
births), 2006 
5.6 12.9 5.4 4.6 8.3 

Sources: Data from US Census Bureau. (2012). 
Statistical abstract of 
the United States: 2012. Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Office. Retrieved from 
http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab; 
US Census Bureau. (2012). American FactFinder. Retrieved 
from 
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/
index.xhtml; MacDorman, M., & Mathews, T. J. (2011). Infant 
Deaths—United States, 2000–2007. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 60(1), 49–51. 


An Asian American family posing by a cliff on a family vacation
Asian Americans have higher family incomes than whites on the average. 
Although Asian Americans are often viewed as a “model minority,” some 
Asians have been less able than others to achieve economic success, and 
stereotypes of Asians and discrimination against them remain serious 
problems. LindaDee2006 
– CC BY-NC-ND 2.0. 

The picture presented by 
Table 3.2 “Selected Indicators of Racial 
and Ethnic Inequality in the United States” 
is clear: US racial and 
ethnic groups differ dramatically in their life chances. Compared 
to whites, for example, African Americans, Latinos, and Native 
Americans have much lower family incomes and much higher rates 
of poverty; they are also much less likely to have college degrees. 
In addition, African Americans and Native Americans have much 
higher infant mortality rates than whites: Black infants, for example, 
are more than twice as likely as white infants to die. Later chapters 
in this book will continue to highlight various dimensions of racial 
and ethnic inequality. 

Although 
Table 3.2 “Selected Indicators of Racial and Ethnic 
Inequality in the United States” 
shows that African Americans, 
Latinos, and Native Americans fare much worse than whites, it 
presents a more complex pattern for Asian Americans. Compared to 


whites, Asian Americans have higher family incomes and are more 
likely to hold college degrees, but they also have a higher poverty 
rate. Thus many Asian Americans do relatively well, while others 
fare relatively worse, as just noted. Although Asian Americans are 
often viewed as a “model minority,” meaning that they have achieved 
economic success despite not being white, some Asians have been 
less able than others to climb the economic ladder. Moreover, 
stereotypes of Asian Americans and discrimination against them 
remain serious problems (Chou & Feagin, 2008). Even the overall 
success rate of Asian Americans obscures the fact that their 
occupations and incomes are often lower than would be expected 
from their educational attainment. They thus have to work harder 
for their success than whites do (Hurh & Kim, 1999). 

The Increasing Racial/Ethnic Wealth Gap 

At the beginning of this chapter, we noted that racial and ethnic 
inequality has existed since the beginning of the United States. We 
also noted that social scientists have warned that certain conditions 
have actually worsened for people of color since the 1960s (Hacker, 
2003; Massey & Sampson, 2009). 

Recent evidence of this worsening appeared in a report by the 
Pew Research Center (2011). The report focused on racial disparities 
in wealth, which includes a family’s total assets (income, savings, 
and investments, home equity, etc.) and debts (mortgage, credit 
cards, etc.). The report found that the wealth gap between white 
households on the one hand and African American and Latino 
households, on the other hand, was much wider than just a few 
years earlier, thanks to the faltering US economy since 2008 that 
affected blacks more severely than whites. 

According to the report, whites’ median wealth was ten times 
greater than blacks’ median wealth in 2007, a discouraging disparity 
for anyone who believes in racial equality. By 2009, however, whites’ 


median wealth had jumped to twenty times greater than blacks’ 
median wealth and eighteen times greater than Latinos’ median 
wealth. White households had a median net worth of about $113,000, 
while black and Latino households had a median net worth of only 
$5,700 and $6,300, respectively (see 
Figure 3.5 “The Racial/Ethnic 
Wealth Gap (Median Net Worth of Households in 2009)”). This racial 
and ethnic difference is the largest since the government began 
tracking wealth more than a quarter-century ago. 

Figure 3.5 
The Racial/Ethnic Wealth Gap (Median Net Worth of 
Households in 2009) 

The Racial/Ethnic Wealth Gap (Median Net Worth of Households in 2009). This shows that the median net worth of a white house hold is more than 10 times the amount of the average black and hispanic ones
Source: Pew 
Research 
Center, 2011. 

A large racial/ethnic gap also existed in the percentage of families 
with negative net worth—that is, those whose debts exceed their 
assets. One-third of black and Latino households had negative net 
worth, compared to only 15 percent of white households. Black and 
Latino’s households were thus more than twice as likely as white 
households to be in debt. 

The Hidden Toll of Racial and Ethnic Inequality 

An increasing amount of evidence suggests that being black in a 
society filled with racial prejudice, discrimination, and inequality 
takes what has been called a “hidden toll” on the lives of African 
Americans (Blitstein, 2009). As we shall see in later chapters, African 



Americans on the average have worse health than whites and die 
at younger ages. In fact, every year there are an additional 100,000 
African American deaths than would be expected if they lived as 
long as whites do. Although many reasons probably explain all these 
disparities, scholars are increasingly concluding that the stress of 
being black is a major factor (Geronimus et al., 2010). 

In this way of thinking, African Americans are much more likely 
than whites to be poor, to live in high-crime neighborhoods, and 
to live in crowded conditions, among many other problems. As this 
chapter discussed earlier, they are also more likely, whether or not 
they are poor, to experience racial slights, refusals to be interviewed 
for jobs, and other forms of discrimination in their everyday lives. 
All these problems mean that African Americans from their earliest 
ages grow up with a great deal of stress, far more than what most 
whites experience. This stress, in turn, has certain neural and 
physiological effects, including hypertension (high blood pressure), 
that impair African Americans’ short-term and long-term health and 
that ultimately shorten their lives. These effects accumulate over 
time: black and white hypertension rates are equal for people in 
their twenties, but the black rate becomes much higher by the time 
people reach their forties and fifties. As a recent news article on 
evidence of this “hidden toll” summarized this process, “The long-
term stress of living in a white-dominated society ‘weathers’ blacks, 
making them age faster than their white counterparts” (Blitstein, 
2009, p. 48). 

Although there is less research on other people of color, many 
Latinos and Native Americans also experience the various sources of 
stress that African Americans experience. To the extent this is true, 
racial and ethnic inequality also takes a hidden toll on members of 
these two groups. They, too, experience racial slights, live under 
disadvantaged conditions, and face other problems that result in 
high levels of stress and shorten their life spans. 


White Privilege: The Benefits of Being White 

A white family smiling for family pictures
American whites enjoy certain privileges merely because they are white. For 
example, they usually do not have to fear that a police officer will stop them 
simply because they are white, and they also generally do not have to worry 
about being mistaken for a bellhop, parking valet, or maid. Loren Kerns – 
Day 
73 
– CC BY 2.0. 

Before we leave this section, it is important to discuss the 
advantages that US whites enjoy in their daily lives simply because 
they are white. Social scientists term these advantages white 
privilege 
and say that whites benefit from being white whether or 
not they are aware of their advantages (McIntosh, 2007). 

This chapter’s discussion of the problems facing people of color 
points to some of these advantages. For example, whites can usually 
drive a car at night or walk down a street without having to fear 
that a police officer will stop them simply because they are white. 
Recalling the Trayvon Martin tragedy, they can also walk down a 
street without having to fear they will be confronted and possibly 


killed by a neighborhood watch volunteer. In addition, whites can 
count on being able to move into any neighborhood they desire to 
as long as they can afford the rent or mortgage. They generally do 
not have to fear being passed up for a promotion simply because of 
their race. White students can live in college dorms without having 
to worry that racial slurs will be directed their way. White people, in 
general, do not have to worry about being the victims of hate crimes 
based on their race. They can be seated in a restaurant without 
having to worry that they will be served more slowly or not at all 
because of their skin color. If they are in a hotel, they do not have 
to think that someone will mistake them for a bellhop, parking valet, 
or maid. If they are trying to hail a taxi, they do not have to worry 
about the taxi driver ignoring them because the driver fears he or 
she will be robbed. 

Social scientist Robert W. Terry (1981, p. 120) once summarized 
white privilege as follows: “To be white in America is not to have 
to think about it. Except for hard-core racial supremacists, the 
meaning of being white is having the choice of attending to or 
ignoring one’s own whiteness” (emphasis in original). For people of 
color in the United States, it is not an exaggeration to say that race 
and ethnicity are a daily fact of their existence. Yet whites do not 
generally have to think about being white. As all of us go about 
our daily lives, this basic difference is one of the most important 
manifestations of racial and ethnic inequality in the United States. 

Perhaps because whites do not have to think about being white, 
many studies find they tend to underestimate the degree of racial 
inequality in the United States by assuming that African Americans 
and Latinos are much better off than they really are. As one report 
summarized these studies’ overall conclusion, “Whites tend to have 
a relatively rosy impression of what it means to be a black person in 
America. Whites are more than twice as likely as blacks to believe 
that the position of African Americans has improved a great deal” 
(Vedantam, 2008, p. A3). Because whites think African Americans 
and Latinos fare much better than they really do, that perception 


probably reduces whites’ sympathy for programs designed to 
reduce racial and ethnic inequality. 

Explaining Racial and Ethnic Inequality 

Why does racial and ethnic inequality exist? Why do African 
Americans, Latinos, Native Americans, and some Asian Americans 
fare worse than whites? In answering these questions, many people 
have some very strong opinions. 

Biological Inferiority 

One long-standing explanation is that blacks and other people of 
color are 
biologically inferior: They are naturally less intelligent and 
have other innate flaws that keep them from getting a good 
education and otherwise doing what needs to be done to achieve 
the American Dream. As discussed earlier, this racist view is no 
longer common today. However, whites historically used this belief 
to justify slavery, lynchings, the harsh treatment of Native 
Americans in the 1800s, and lesser forms of discrimination. In 1994, 
Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray revived this view in their 
controversial book, 
The Bell Curve 
(Herrnstein & Murray, 1994), in 
which they argued that the low IQ scores of African Americans, and 
of poor people more generally, reflect their genetic inferiority in the 
area of intelligence. African Americans’ low innate intelligence, they 
said, accounts for their poverty and other problems. Although the 
news media gave much attention to their book, few scholars agreed 
with its views, and many condemned the book’s argument as a racist 
way of “blaming the victim” (Gould, 1994). 


Cultural Deficiencies 

Another explanation of racial and ethnic inequality focuses on the 
supposed cultural deficiencies 
of African Americans and other 
people of color (Murray, 1984). These deficiencies include a failure to 
value hard work and, for African Americans, a lack of strong family 
ties, and are said to account for the poverty and other problems 
facing these minorities. This view echoes the culture-of-poverty 
argument presented in 
Chapter 2 “Poverty” 
and is certainly popular 
today. As we saw earlier, more than half of non-Latino whites think 
that blacks’ poverty is due to their lack of motivation and willpower. 
Ironically some scholars find support for this cultural deficiency 
view in the experience of many Asian Americans, whose success 
is often attributed to their culture’s emphasis on hard work, 
educational attainment, and strong family ties (Min, 2005). If that 
is true, these scholars say, then the lack of success of other people 
of color stems from the failure of their own cultures to value these 
attributes. 

How accurate is the cultural deficiency argument? Whether 
people of color have “deficient” cultures remains hotly debated 
(Bonilla-Silva, 2009). Many social scientists find little or no evidence 
of cultural problems in minority communities and say the belief in 
cultural deficiencies is an example of symbolic racism that blames 
the victim. Citing survey evidence, they say that poor people of 
color value work and education for themselves and their children 
at least as much as wealthier white people do (Holland, 2011; 
Muhammad, 2007). Yet other social scientists, including those 
sympathetic to the structural problems facing people of color, 
believe that certain cultural problems do exist, but they are careful 
to say that these cultural problems arise out of the structural 
problems. For example, Elijah Anderson (1999) wrote that a “street 
culture” or “oppositional culture” exists among African Americans in 
urban areas that contribute to high levels of violent behavior, but 
he emphasized that this type of culture stems from the segregation, 


extreme poverty, and other difficulties these citizens face in their 
daily lives and helps them deal with these difficulties. Thus even if 
cultural problems do exist, they should not obscure the fact that 
structural problems are responsible for the cultural ones. 

Structural Problems 

A third explanation for US racial and ethnic inequality is based 
on conflict theory and reflects the blaming-the-system approach 
outlined in Chapter 1 “Understanding Social Problems”. This view 
attributes racial and ethnic inequality to 
structural problems, 
including institutional and individual discrimination, a lack of 
opportunity in education and other spheres of life, and the absence 
of jobs that pay an adequate wage (Feagin, 2006). Segregated 
housing, for example, prevents African Americans from escaping 
the inner city and from moving to areas with greater employment 
opportunities. Employment discrimination keeps the salaries of 
people of color much lower than they would be otherwise. The 
schools that many children of color attend every day are typically 
overcrowded and underfunded. As these problems continue from 
one generation to the next, it becomes very difficult for people 
already at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder to climb up it 
because of their race and ethnicity (see 
Note 3.33 “Applying Social 
Research”). 

Applying Social Research 

The Poor Neighborhoods of Middle-Class African 
Americans 


In a society that values equal opportunity for all, scholars 
have discovered a troubling trend: African American 
children from middle-class families are much more likely 
than white children from middle-class families to move 
down the socioeconomic ladder by the time they become 
adults. In fact, almost half of all African American children 
born during the 1950s and 1960s to middle-class parents 
ended up with lower incomes than their parents by 
adulthood. Because these children had parents who had 
evidently succeeded despite all the obstacles facing them in 
a society filled with racial inequality, we have to assume 
they were raised with the values, skills, and aspirations 
necessary to stay in the middle class and even to rise 
beyond it. What, then, explains why some end up doing 
worse than their parents? 

According to a recent study written by sociologist Patrick 
Sharkey for the Pew Charitable Trusts, one important 
answer lies in the neighborhoods in which these children 
are raised. Because of continuing racial segregation, many 
middle-class African American families find themselves 
having to live in poor urban neighborhoods. About half of 
African American children born between 1955 and 1970 to 
middle-class parents grew up in poor neighborhoods, but 
hardly any middle-class white children grew up in such 
neighborhoods. In Sharkey’s statistical analysis, 
neighborhood poverty was a much more important factor 
than variables such as parents’ education and marital status 
in explaining the huge racial difference in the eventual 
socioeconomic status of middle-class children. An 
additional finding of the study underscored the importance 
of neighborhood poverty for adult socioeconomic status: 
African American children raised in poor neighborhoods in 


which the poverty rate declined significantly ended up with 
higher incomes as adults than those raised in 
neighborhoods where the poverty rate did not change. 

Why do poor neighborhoods have this effect? It is 
difficult to pinpoint the exact causes, but several probable 
reasons come to mind. In these neighborhoods, middle-
class African American children often receive inadequate 
schooling at run-down schools, and they come under the 
influence of youths who care much less about schooling 
and who get into various kinds of trouble. The various 
problems associated with living in poor neighborhoods also 
likely cause a good deal of stress, which, as discussed 
elsewhere in this chapter, can cause health problems and 
impair learning ability. 

Even if the exact reasons remain unclear, this study 
showed that poor neighborhoods make a huge difference. 
As a Pew official summarized the study, “We’ve known that 
neighborhood matters…but this does it in a new and 
powerful way. Neighborhoods become a significant drag 
not just on the poor, but on those who would otherwise be 
stable.” Sociologist Sharkey added, “What surprises me is 
how dramatic the racial differences are in terms of the 
environments in which children are raised. There’s this 
perception that after the civil rights period, families have 
been more able to seek out any neighborhood they choose 
and that…the racial gap in neighborhoods would whittle 
away over time, and that hasn’t happened.” 

Data from the 2010 Census confirm that the racial gap in 
neighborhoods persists. A study by sociologist John R. 
Logan for the Russell Sage Foundation found that African 
American and Latino families with incomes above $75,000 
are more likely to live in poor neighborhoods than non-


Latino white families with incomes below $40,000. More 
generally, Logan concluded, “The average affluent black or 
Hispanic household lives in a poorer neighborhood than the 
average lower-income white household.” 

One implication of this neighborhood research is clear: to 
help reduce African American poverty, it is important to do 
everything possible to improve the quality and economy of 
the poor neighborhoods in which many African American 
children, middle-class or poor, grow up. 

Sources: Logan, 2011; MacGillis, 2009; Sharkey, 2009 

As we assess the importance of structure versus culture in 
explaining why people of color have higher poverty rates, it is 
interesting to consider the economic experience of African 
Americans and Latinos since the 1990s. During that decade, the US 
economy thrived. Along with this thriving economy, unemployment 
rates for African Americans and Latinos declined and their poverty 
rates also declined. Since the early 2000s and especially since 2008, 
the US economy has faltered. Along with this faltering economy, 
unemployment and poverty rates for African Americans and Latinos 
increased. 

To explain these trends, does it make sense to assume that African 
Americans and Latinos somehow had fewer cultural deficiencies 
during the 1990s and more cultural deficiencies since the early 
2000s? Or does it make sense to assume that their economic 
success or lack of it depended on the opportunities afforded them 
by the US economy? Economic writer Joshua Holland (2011) provides 
the logical answer by attacking the idea of cultural deficiencies: 
“That’s obviously nonsense. It was exogenous economic factors and 
changes in public policies, not manifestations of ‘black culture’ [or 
‘Latino culture’], that resulted in those widely varied 
outcomes…While economic swings this significant can be explained 


by economic changes and different public policies, it’s simply 
impossible to fit them into a cultural narrative.” 

Reducing Racial and Ethnic Inequality 

Now that we have examined race and ethnicity in the United States, 
what have we found? Where do we stand in the second decade of 
the twenty-first century? Did the historic election of Barack Obama 
as president in 2008 signify a new era of equality between the 
races, as many observers wrote, or did his election occur despite the 
continued existence of pervasive racial and ethnic inequality? 

On the one hand, there is cause for hope. Legal segregation is 
gone. The vicious, “old-fashioned” racism that was so rampant in 
this country into the 1960s has declined dramatically since that 
tumultuous time. People of color have made important gains in 
several spheres of life, and African Americans and other people 
of color occupy some important elected positions in and outside 
the South, a feat that would have been unimaginable a generation 
ago. Perhaps most notably, Barack Obama has African ancestry and 
identifies as an African American, and on his 2008 election night, 
people across the country wept with joy at the symbolism of his 
victory. Certainly, progress has been made in US racial and ethnic 
relations. 

On the other hand, there is also cause for despair. Old-fashioned 
racism has been replaced by modern, symbolic racism that still 
blames people of color for their problems and reduces public 
support for government policies to deal with their problems. 
Institutional discrimination remains pervasive, and hate crimes, 
such as the cross-burning that began this chapter, remain all too 
common. So does suspicion of people based solely on the color of 
their skin, as the Trayvon Martin tragedy again reminds us. 

If adequately funded and implemented, several types of programs 
and policies show a strong promise of reducing racial and ethnic 


inequality. We turn to these in a moment, but first let’s discuss 
affirmative action, an issue that has aroused controversy since its 
inception. 

People Making a Difference 

College Students and the Southern Civil Rights 
Movement 

The first chapter of this book included this famous 
quotation by anthropologist Margaret Mead: “Never doubt 
that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can 
change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.” 
The beginnings of the Southern civil rights movement 
provide an inspirational example of Mead’s wisdom and 
remind us that young people can make a difference. 

Although there had been several efforts during the 1950s 
by African Americans to end legal segregation in the South, 
the start of the civil rights movement is commonly thought 
to have begun on February 1, 1960. On that historic day, 
four brave African American students from the Agricultural 
and Technical College of North Carolina, dressed in coats 
and ties, sat down quietly at a segregated lunch counter in 
a Woolworth’s store in the city of Greensboro and asked to 
be served. When they were refused service, they stayed 
until the store closed at the end of the day, and then went 
home. They returned the next day and were joined by some 
two dozen other students. They were again refused service 
and sat quietly for the rest of the day. The next day some 
sixty students and other people joined them, followed by 
some three hundred on the fourth day. Within a week, sit-


ins were occurring at lunch counters in several other towns 
and cities inside and outside of North Carolina. In late July 
1960, the Greensboro Woolworth’s finally served African 
Americans, and the entire Woolworth’s chain desegregated 
its lunch counters a day later. Although no one realized it at 
the time, the civil rights movement had “officially” begun 
thanks to the efforts of a small group of college students. 

During the remaining years of the heyday of the civil 
rights movement, college students from the South and 
North joined thousands of other people in sit-ins, marches, 
and other activities to end legal segregation. Thousands 
were arrested, and at least forty-one were murdered. By 
risking their freedom and even their lives, they made a 
difference for millions of African Americans. And it all 
began when a small group of college students sat down at a 
lunch counter in Greensboro and politely refused to leave 
until they were served. 

Sources: 
Branch, 1988; Southern Poverty Law Center, 2011 

Affirmative Action 

Affirmative action 
refers to special consideration for minorities and 
women in employment and education to compensate for the 
discrimination and lack of opportunities they experience in the 
larger society. Affirmative action programs were begun in the 1960s 
to provide African Americans and, later, other people of color and 
women access to jobs and education to make up for past 
discrimination. President John F. Kennedy was the first known 
official to use the term, when he signed an executive order in 1961 
ordering federal contractors to “take affirmative action” in ensuring 


that applicants are hired and treated without regard to their race 
and national origin. Six years later, President Lyndon B. Johnson 
added sex to race and national origin as demographic categories for 
which affirmative action should be used. 

Although many affirmative action programs remain in effect 
today, court rulings, state legislation, and other efforts have limited 
their number and scope. Despite this curtailment, affirmative action 
continues to spark much controversy, with scholars, members of 
the public, and elected officials all holding strong views on the issue. 

One of the major court rulings just mentioned was the US 
Supreme Court’s decision in 
Regents of the University of California 
v. Bakke, 438 US 265 (1978). Allan Bakke was a 35-year-old white 
man who had twice been rejected for admission into the medical 
school at the University of California, Davis. At the time he applied, 
UC–Davis had a policy of reserving sixteen seats in its entering 
class of one hundred for qualified people of color to make up for 
their underrepresentation in the medical profession. Bakke’s college 
grades and scores on the Medical College Admission Test were 
higher than those of the people of color admitted to UC–Davis 
either time Bakke applied. He sued for admission on the grounds 
that his rejection amounted to reverse racial discrimination on the 
basis of his being white (Stefoff, 2005). 

The case eventually reached the Supreme Court, which ruled 5–4 
that Bakke must be admitted into the UC–Davis medical school 
because he had been unfairly denied admission on the basis of his 
race. As part of its historic but complex decision, the Court thus 
rejected the use of strict racial quotas in admission, as it declared 
that no applicant could be excluded based solely on the applicant’s 
race. At the same time, however, the Court also declared that race 
may be used as one of the several criteria that admissions 
committees consider when making their decisions. For example, if 
an institution desires racial diversity among its students, it may use 
race as an admissions criterion along with other factors such as 
grades and test scores. 

Two more recent Supreme Court cases both involved the 


University of Michigan: 
Gratz v. Bollinger, 539 US 244 (2003), which 
involved the university’s undergraduate admissions, and 
Grutter v. 
Bollinger, 539 US 306 (2003), which involved the university’s law 
school admissions. In 
Grutter 
the Court reaffirmed the right of 
institutions of higher education to take race into account in the 
admissions process. In 
Gratz, however, the Court invalidated the 
university’s policy of awarding additional points to high school 
students of color as part of its use of a point system to evaluate 
applicants; the Court said that consideration of applicants needed 
to be more individualized than a point system allowed. 

Drawing on these Supreme Court rulings, then, affirmative action 
in higher education admissions on the basis of race/ethnicity is 
permissible as long as it does not involve a rigid quota system 
and as long as it does involve an individualized way of evaluating 
candidates. Race may be used as one of several criteria in such an 
individualized evaluation process, but it must not be used as the 
only criterion. 

The Debate over Affirmative Action 

Opponents of affirmative action cite several reasons for opposing 
it (Connors, 2009). Affirmative action, they say, is reverse 
discrimination and, as such, is both illegal and immoral. The people 
benefiting from affirmative action are less qualified than many of 
the whites with whom they compete for employment and college 
admissions. In addition, opponents say, affirmative action implies 
that the people benefiting from it need extra help and thus are 
indeed less qualified. This implication stigmatizes the groups 
benefiting from affirmative action. 

In response, proponents of affirmative action give several reasons 
for favoring it (Connors, 2009). Many say it is needed to make up not 
just for past discrimination and a lack of opportunities for people of 
color but also for ongoing discrimination and a lack of opportunity. 


For example, because of their social networks, whites are much 
better able than people of color to find out about and to get jobs 
(Reskin, 1998). If this is true, people of color are automatically at a 
disadvantage in the job market, and some form of affirmative action 
is needed to give them an equal chance at employment. Proponents 
also say that affirmative action helps add diversity to the workplace 
and to the campus. Many colleges, they note, give some preference 
to high school students who live in a distant state in order to add 
needed diversity to the student body; to “legacy” students—those 
with a parent who went to the same institution—to reinforce alumni 
loyalty and to motivate alumni to donate to the institution; and to 
athletes, musicians, and other applicants with certain specialized 
talents and skills. If all these forms of preferential admission make 
sense, proponents say, it also makes sense to take students’ racial 
and ethnic backgrounds into account as admissions officers strive 
to have a diverse student body. 

Proponents add that affirmative action has indeed succeeded in 
expanding employment and educational opportunities for people of 
color and that individuals benefiting from affirmative action have 
generally fared well in the workplace or on the campus. In this 
regard, research finds that African American students graduating 
from selective US colleges and universities after being admitted 
under affirmative action guidelines are slightly more 
likely than 
their white counterparts to obtain professional degrees and to 
become involved in civic affairs (Bowen & Bok, 1998). 

As this brief discussion indicates, several reasons exist for and 
against affirmative action. A cautious view is that affirmative action 
may not be perfect but that some form of it is needed to make 
up for past and ongoing discrimination and lack of opportunity 
in the workplace and on the campus. Without the extra help that 
affirmative action programs give disadvantaged people of color, the 
discrimination and other difficulties they face are certain to 
continue. 


Other Programs and Policies 

As indicated near the beginning of this chapter, one message from 
DNA evidence and studies of evolution is that we are all part of one 
human race. If we fail to recognize this lesson, we are doomed to 
repeat the experiences of the past, when racial and ethnic hostility 
overtook good reason and subjected people who happened to look 
different from the white majority to legal, social, and violent 
oppression. In the democracy that is America, we must try to do 
better so that there will truly be “liberty and justice for all.” 

As the United States attempts, however haltingly, to reduce racial 
and ethnic inequality, sociology has much insight to offer in its 
emphasis on the structural basis for this inequality. This emphasis 
strongly indicates that racial and ethnic inequality has much less 
to do with any personal faults of people of color than with the 
structural obstacles they face, including ongoing discrimination and 
lack of opportunity. Efforts aimed at such obstacles, then, are in the 
long run essential to reducing racial and ethnic inequality (Danziger, 
Reed, & Brown, 2004; Syme, 2008; Walsh, 2011). Some of these 
efforts resemble those for reducing poverty discussed in 
Chapter 2 
“Poverty”, given the greater poverty of many people of color, and 
include the following: 

1. Adopt a national “full employment” policy involving federally 
funded job training and public works programs. 
2. Increase federal aid for the working poor, including earned 
income credits and child-care subsidies for those with 
children. 
3. Establish and expand well-funded early childhood intervention 
programs, including home visitation by trained professionals, 
for poor families, as well as adolescent intervention programs, 
such as Upward Bound, for low-income teenagers. 
4. Improve the schools that poor children attend and the 
schooling they receive, and expand early childhood education 



programs for poor children. 
5. Provide better nutrition and health services for poor families 
with young children. 
6. Strengthen efforts to reduce teenage pregnancies. 
7. Strengthen affirmative action programs within the limits 
imposed by court rulings. 
8. Strengthen legal enforcement of existing laws forbidding racial 
and ethnic discrimination in hiring and promotion. 
9. Strengthen efforts to reduce residential segregation. 


Key Takeaways 

Racial and ethnic prejudice and discrimination have 
been an “American dilemma” in the United States ever 
since the colonial period. Slavery was only the ugliest 
manifestation of this dilemma. The urban riots of the 
1960s led to warnings about the racial hostility and 
discrimination confronting African Americans and 
other groups, and these warnings continue down to 
the present. 
Social scientists today tend to consider race more 
of a social category than a biological one for several 
reasons. Race is thus best considered a social 
construction and not a fixed biological category. 
Ethnicity refers to a shared cultural heritage and is 
a term increasingly favored by social scientists over 
race. Membership in ethnic groups gives many people 



an important sense of identity and pride but can also 
lead to hostility toward people in other ethnic groups. 
Prejudice, racism, and stereotypes all refer to 
negative attitudes about people based on their 
membership in racial or ethnic categories. Social-
psychological explanations of prejudice focus on 
scapegoating and authoritarian personalities, while 
sociological explanations focus on conformity and 
socialization or on economic and political 
competition. Jim Crow racism has given way to 
modern or symbolic racism that considers people of 
color to be culturally inferior. 
Discrimination and prejudice often go hand in 
hand, but not always. People can discriminate 
without being prejudiced, and they can be prejudiced 
without discriminating. Individual and institutional 
discrimination both continue to exist in the United 
States. 
Racial and ethnic inequality in the United States is 
reflected in income, employment, education, and 
health statistics. In their daily lives, whites enjoy 
many privileges denied to their counterparts in other 
racial and ethnic groups. 
On many issues Americans remain sharply divided 
along racial and ethnic lines. One of the most divisive 
issues is affirmative action. Its opponents view it 
among other things as reverse discrimination, while 
its proponents cite many reasons for its importance, 
including the need to correct past and present 
discrimination against racial and ethnic minorities. 



Critical Thinking 

After graduating from college, you obtain a job in a 
medium-sized city in the Midwest and rent an apartment in 
a house in a nearby town. A family with an African American 
father and white mother has recently moved into a house 
down the street. You think nothing of it, but you begin to 
hear some of the neighbors expressed concern that the 
neighborhood “has begun to change.” Then one night a 
brick is thrown through the window of the new family’s 
home, and around the brick is wrapped the message, “Go 
back to where you came from!” Since you’re new to the 
neighborhood yourself, you don’t want to make waves, but 
you are also shocked by this act of racial hatred. You can 
speak up somehow or you can stay quiet. What do you 
decide to do? Why? 


What You Can Do 

To help reduce racial and ethnic inequality, you 
may wish to do any of the following: 

1. Contribute money to a local, state, or national 
organization that tries to help youths of color at 
their schools, homes, or other venues. 
2. Volunteer for an organization that focuses on 
policy issues related to race and ethnicity. 
3. Volunteer for any programs at your campus 
that aim at enhancing the educational success 
of new students of color; if no such programs 
exist, start one. 





References 

Anderson, E. (1999). 
Code of the street: Decency, violence, and the 
moral life of the inner city. New York, NY: W. W. Norton. 

Barrionuevo, A., & Calmes, J. (2011, March 21). President 
underscores similarities with Brazilians but sidesteps one. New York 
Times, p. A8. 

Begley, S. (2008, February 29). Race and DNA. 
Newsweek. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/blogs/
lab-notes/2008/02/29/race-and-dna.html. 


Berger, P., & Luckmann, T. (1963). 
The social construction of reality. 
New York, NY: Doubleday. 

Blitstein, R. (2009). Weathering the storm. 
Miller-McCune, 
2(July–August), 48–57. 

Bonilla-Silva, E. (2009). 
Racism without racists: Color-blind racism 
and the persistence of racial inequality in the United States 
(3rd ed.). 
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 

Bowen, W. G., & Bok, D. C. (1998). 
The shape of the river: Long-
term consequences of considering race in college and university 
admissions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Branch, T. (1988). 
Parting the waters: America in the King years, 
1954–1963. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster. 

Brown, D. A. (2009). 
Bury my heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian 
history of the American West. New York, NY: Sterling Innovation. 

Brown, R. M. (1975). 
Strain of violence: Historical studies of 
American violence and vigilantism. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press. 

Chou, R. S., & Feagin, J. R. (2008). 
The myth of the model minority: 
Asian Americans facing racism. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 

Connors, P. (Ed.). (2009). 
Affirmative action. Farmington Hills, MI: 
Greenhaven Press. 

Danziger, S., Reed, D., & Brown, T. N. (2004). 
Poverty and 
prosperity: Prospects for reducing racial economic disparities in the 
United States. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations Research 
Institute for Social Development. 

Dinnerstein, L., & Reimers, D. M. (2009). 
Ethnic Americans: A 
history of immigration. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. 

Feagin, J. R. (2006). 
Systematic racism: A theory of oppression. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 

Geronimus, A. T., Hicken, M., Pearson, J., Seashols, S., Brown, K., 
& Cruz., T. D. (2010). Do US black women experience stress-related 
accelerated biological aging? 
Human Nature: An Interdisciplinary 
Biosocial Perspective, 21, 19–38. 

Gould, S. J. (1994, November 28). Curveball. 
The New Yorker, pp. 
139–149. 


Hacker, A. (2003). 
Two nations: Black and white, separate, hostile, 
unequal 
(Rev. ed.). New York, NY: Scribner. 

Herrnstein, R. J., & Murray, C. (1994). 
The bell curve: Intelligence 
and class structure in American life. New York, NY: Free Press. 

Holland, J. (2011, July 29). Debunking the big lie right-wingers 
use to justify black poverty and unemployment. AlterNet. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.alternet.org/teaparty/151830/
debunking_the_big_lie_right-
wingers_use_to_justify_black_poverty _and_unemployment_. 

Hurh, W. M., & Kim, K. C. (1999). The “success” image of Asian 
Americans: Its validity, and its practical and theoretical implications. 
In C. G. Ellison & W. A. Martin (Eds.), 
Race and ethnic relations in the 
United States 
(pp. 115–122). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury. 

Jablon, R. (2011, March 23). Anger, shock over cross burning in 
Calif. community. 
washingtonpost.com. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/
2011/03/23/AR2011032300301.html. 

Kerner Commission. (1968). 
Report of the National Advisory 
Commission on civil disorders. New York, NY: Bantam Books. 

Klein, H. S., & Luno, F. V. (2009). 
Slavery in Brazil. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Leland, J., & Beals, G. (1997, May 5). In living colors: Tiger Woods is 
the exception that rules. 
Newsweek, 58–60. 

Lerner, D. (2011, July 22). Police chief says suspects wanted to 
“terrorize” cross burning victim. 
ksby.com. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.ksby.com/news/police-chief-says-suspects-
wanted-to-terrorize-cross-burning-victim/. 

Litwack, L. F. (2009). 
How free is free? The long death of Jim Crow. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Logan, J. R. (2011). 
Separate and unequal: The neighborhood gap for 
blacks, Hispanics and Asians in metropolitan America. New York, NY: 
US201 Project. 

MacGillis, A. (2009, July 27). Neighborhoods key to future income, 
study finds. 
The Washington Post, p. A06. 

Mann, C. (2011, March 22). Cross burning in Calif. suburb brings 


FBI into hate crime investigation. 
cbsnews.com. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.cbsnews.com/. 

Massey, D. S. (2007). 
Categorically unequal: The American 
stratification system. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation. 

Massey, D. S., & Sampson, R. J. (2009). Moynihan redux: Legacies 
and lessons. 
The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science, 621, 6–27. 

McIntosh, P. (2007). White privilege and male privilege: A personal 
account of coming to see correspondence through work in women’s 
studies. In M. L. Andersen & P. H. Collins (Eds.), 
Race, class, and 
gender: An anthology 
(6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Min, P. G. (Ed.). (2005). 
Asian Americans: Contemporary trends and 
issues 
(2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

Muhammad, K. G. (2007, December 9). White may be might, but 
it’s not always right. 
The Washington Post, p. B3. 

Murray, C. (1984). 
Losing ground: American social policy, 
1950–1980. New York, NY: Basic Books. 

Myrdal, G. (1944). 
An American dilemma: The negro problem and 
modern democracy. New York, NY: Harper and Brothers. 

Painter, N. I. (2010). 
The history of white people. New York, NY: W. 
W. Norton. 

Pew Research Center. (2011). 
Twenty-to-one: Wealth gaps rise to 
record highs between whites, blacks and Hispanics. Washington, DC: 
Author. 

Reskin, B. F. (1998). 
Realities of affirmative action in employment. 
Washington, DC: American Sociological Association. 

Sharkey, P. (2009). 
Neighborhoods and the black-white mobility 
gap. Washington, DC: Pew Charitable Trusts. 

Smedley, A. (2007). 
Race in North America: Evolution of a 
worldview. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 

Southern Poverty Law Center. (2011). 41 lives for freedom. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.crmvet.org/mem/41lives.htm. 

Staples, B. (1998, November 13). The shifting meanings of “black” 
and “white.” 
New York Times, p. WK14. 


Staples, B. (2005, October 31). Why race isn’t as “black” and “white” 
as we think. 
New York Times, p. A18. 

Stefoff, R. (2005). 
The Bakke case: Challenging affirmative action. 
New York, NY: Marshall Cavendish Benchmark. 

Stone, L., & Lurquin, P. F. (2007). 
Genes, culture, and human 
evolution: A synthesis. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 

Syme, S. L. (2008). Reducing racial and social-class inequalities in 
health: The need for a new approach. Health Affairs, 27, 456–459. 

Telles, E. E. (2006). 
Race in another America: The significance of 
skin color in Brazil. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Terry, R. W. (1981). The negative impact on white values. In B. 
P. Bowser & R. G. Hunt (Eds.), 
Impacts of racism on white 
Americans 
(pp. 119–151). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. 

Vedantam, S. (2008, March 24). Unequal perspectives on racial 
equality. 
The Washington Post, p. A3. 

Walsh, R. (2011). Helping or hurting: Are adolescent intervention 
programs minimizing racial inequality? 
Education & Urban Society, 
43(3), 370–395. 

Wilson, W. J. (2009). The economic plight of inner-city black 
males. In E. Anderson (Ed.), 
Against the wall: Poor, young, black, and 
male 
(pp. 55–70). Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 3.1, 3.2, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, and 3.8 from Social 
Problems by the University of Minnesota under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 
International License, except where otherwise noted. 


PART 
V 
PRE-PREGNANCY & 
PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore and connect a Theory, Approach, or 
Perspective to work in critical thinking skills for 
client assessments 
Explore important aspects of a person’s 
experience and ability to justify why they are 
important 


Vignette 

pregnant belly
Photo by freestocks on Unsplash 

Sabrina is a 28 y/o Caucasian 
female. She has chosen to share 
some of her journal entries to 
provide information with the 
Family Planning worker she is 
meeting with. 

Sept 11th: Why is this so 
hard?!? 4 miscarriages before we 
had Carly, I got through that and 


have so loved being a mom – why does it have to keep happening? 
3 more miscarriages since trying again – will it always be this way? 
Will I ever get to have anymore children? What’s wrong with me???? 

Oct 31st: PREGNANT!!!! I know it’s early but I still get SO excited!!! 
I haven’t told Mark yet since it’s only 5 weeks – I don’t want him 
to get his hopes up and get disappointed AGAIN. Keeping my fingers 
crossed!!! 

Nov 21st: 8 weeks and everything is going great! I finally told Mark 
and he was SO excited too – we both want a big family and we get to 
add another baby!!! Even though I’ve been feeling good we’ve decided 
to keep the news to ourselves for a while longer, just to make sure… 

Dec 12th: 11 weeks and OF COURSE something had to go wrong. We 
had the First Trimester Combined test done and the news isn’t great. 
Why do bad things have to keep happening when I try and have a 
baby?!? Why is it so hard??? They said the baby is at risk of having 
Trisomy 13 – severe development delays, that’s all I keep hearing in my 
head over and over – I’m so scared of what’s going to happen… They 
said not to worry, we still have more testing to do, but how can I not 
worry?!? I’m not even sure what it all means! I’m trying to tell myself 
to stay calm and hope for the best but with all that’s happened before, 
how can I not worry??? 

Dec 22nd: It’s Christmas time but how can I be happy? We just got 
the results back yesterday. 50% chance the baby will have Trisomy 18. 
WHY??? Why can’t it be easy and normal??? I’m heartbroken and SO 
SO angry!!! And I have no idea what Mark’s thinking. I know he’s said 
before he doesn’t believe in abortion and neither do I, but how can 
we take care of a baby that will have so many severe needs? I know 
how awful that sounds and maybe I’m an awful person. I’ve prayed 
for another baby for so long and God’s finally answered my prayers, 
but how am I supposed to handle all of this? Taking care of Carly, the 
house, the dogs, EVERYTHING!!! What if I have to quit my job to stay 
home and take care of this baby? How will we make it? We can’t afford 
for me to stop working – we barely make it as it is now!!! And what 
would our friends and family think? They would never allow it, or 
never talk to us again – but they’re not the ones who will have to take 


care of this baby!!! I feel so alone in this right now and just don’t know 
what to do… 

Critical Thinking: 

What theory, approach, or perspective from 
previous Dimensions (PIE, Biopsychosocial, 
Sociocultural, or Social Change) would you use to 
assess this client? Why? 
What do you feel are the most important 
aspects (physical development, attachment, sexual 
development, etc) to consider for this client? 
Why? 


References 

Hutchinson, E. D. (2019). Dimensions of human behavior (Sixth 
edition). Sage Publications, Inc. 


Chapter 9: Heredity, Prenatal 
Development, & Birth 

Chapter 9 Learning Objectives 

Distinguish between mitosis and meiosis, genotype 
and phenotype, homozygous and heterozygous, and 
dominant and recessive. 
Describe some genetic disorders, due to a gene 
defect, and chromosomal disorders. 
Define behavioral genetics, describe genotype-
environment correlations and genotype-
environmental interactions, and define epigenetics. 
Describe the changes that occur in the three 
periods of prenatal development 
Describe what occurs during prenatal brain 
development 
Define teratogens and describe the factors that 
influence their effects 
Explain maternal and paternal factors that affect 
the developing fetus 
Explain the types of prenatal assessment 
Describe both the minor and major complications 
of pregnancy 
Describe how expectant parents prepare for 



childbirth 
Describe the stages of vaginal delivery 
Explain why a cesarean or induced birth is 
necessary 
Describe the two common procedures to assess the 
condition of the newborn 
Describe problems newborns experience before, 
during, and after birth 


Heredity 

As you recall from chapter one, nature refers to the contribution 
of genetics to one’s development. The basic building block of the 
nature perspective is the gene. Genes are a specific sequence of 
nucleotides and are recipes for making proteins. Proteins are 
responsible for influencing the structure and functions of cells. 
Genes are located on the chromosomes and there are an estimated 
20,500 genes for humans, according to the Human Genome Project 
(NIH, 2015). 


Normal human cells contain 46 chromosomes (or 23 pairs; one from 
each parent) in the nucleus of the cells. After conception, most 
cells of the body are created by a process called mitosis. Mitosis 
is defined as the cell’s nucleus making an exact copy of all the 
chromosomes and splitting into two new cells. However, the cells 
used in sexual reproduction, called the gametes (sperm or ova), 
are formed in a process called meiosis. In meiosis, the gamete’s 
chromosomes duplicate and then divide twice resulting in four cells 
containing only half the genetic material of the original gamete. 
Thus, each sperm and egg possesses only 23 chromosomes and 
combine to produce the normal 46. 
Given the amount of genes 
present and the unpredictability of the meiosis process, the 
likelihood of having offspring that are genetically identical (and not 
twins) is one in trillions (Gould & Keeton, 1997). 

Of the 23 pairs of chromosomes created at conception, 22 pairs 
are similar in length. These are called autosomes. The remaining 
pair, or sex chromosomes, may differ in length. If a child receives 
the combination of XY the child will be genetically male. If the child 
receives the combination XX the child will be genetically female. 


Genotypes and Phenotypes 

The word genotype refers to the sum total of all the genes a person 
inherits. The word phenotype refers to the features that are actually 
expressed. Look in the mirror. What do you see, your genotype 
or your phenotype? What determines whether or not genes are 
expressed? Because genes are inherited in pairs on the 
chromosomes, we may receive 


is, be for that characteristic the gene influences. If we 
receive a different version of the gene from each parent, that is 
. In the homozygous situation, we will 
display that characteristic. It is in the heterozygous condition that it 
becomes clear that not all genes are created equal. Some genes are 
either the same version of a gene from our mother and father, that 
homozygousreferred to as heterozygousdominant,meaning they express themselves in the phenotype even 
when paired with a different version of the gene, while their silent 
partner is called recessive. Recessive genes express themselves only 
when paired with a similar version gene. Geneticists refer to 
different versions of a gene as alleles. Some dominant traits include 
having facial dimples, curly hair, normal vision, and dark hair. Some 
recessive traits include red hair, being nearsighted, and straight 
hair. 

Most characteristics are not the result of a single gene; they are 
polygenic, meaning they are the result of several genes. In addition, 
the dominant and recessive patterns described above are usually 
not that simple either. Sometimes the dominant gene does not 
completely suppress the recessive gene; this is called incomplete 
dominance. An example of this can be found in the recessive gene 
disorder sickle cell disease. The gene that produces healthy round-
shaped red blood cells is dominant. The recessive gene causes an 
abnormality in the shape of red blood cells; they take on a sickle 
form, which can clog the veins and deprive vital organs of oxygen 
and increase the risk of stroke. To inherit the disorder a person 
must receive the recessive gene from both parents. Those who have 
inherited only one recessive-gene are called carriers and should 
be unaffected by this recessive trait. Yet, carriers of the sickle cell 
have some red blood cells that take on the c-shaped sickle pattern. 
Under circumstances of oxygen deprivation, such as high altitudes 
or physical exertion, carriers for the sickle cell gene may experience 
some of the symptoms of sickle cell (Berk, 2004). 

Many students are interested in twins. Monozygotic or identical 
twins occur when a fertilized egg splits apart in the first two weeks 
of development. The result is the creation of two separate, but 


genetically identical offspring. That is, they possess the same 
genotype and often the same phenotype. About one-third of twins 
are monozygotic twins. Sometimes, however, two eggs or ova are 
released and fertilized by two separate sperm. The result is 
dizygotic or fraternal twins. These two individuals share the same 
amount of genetic material as would any two children from the 
same mother and father. In other words, they possess a different 
genotype and phenotype. Older mothers are more likely to have 
dizygotic twins than are younger mothers, and couples who use 
fertility drugs are also more likely to give birth to dizygotic twins. 
Consequently, there has been an increase in the number of fraternal 
twins recently (Bortolus et al., 1999). 

Genetic Disorders 

Most of the known genetic disorders are dominant gene-linked; 
however, the vast majority of dominant gene linked disorders are 
not serious or debilitating. For example, the majority of those with 
Tourette’s Syndrome suffer only minor tics from time to time and 
can easily control their symptoms. Huntington’s Disease is a 
dominant gene linked disorder that affects the nervous system and 
is fatal, but does not appear until midlife. Recessive gene disorders, 
such as cystic fibrosis and sickle-cell anemia, are less common, but 
may actually claim more lives because they are less likely to be 
detected as people are unaware that they are carriers of the disease. 
Some genetic disorders are sex-linked; the defective gene is found 
on the X-chromosome. Males have only one X chromosome so are 
at greater risk for sex-linked disorders due to a recessive gene, 
such as hemophilia, color-blindness, and baldness. For females to be 
affected by the genetic defects, they need to inherit the recessive 
gene on both X-chromosomes, but if the defective gene is dominant, 
females can be equally at risk. 


Chromosomal Abnormalities 

A chromosomal abnormality occurs when a child inherits too many 
or too few chromosomes. The most common cause of chromosomal 
abnormalities is the age of the mother. As the mother ages, the 
ovum is more likely to suffer abnormalities due to longer-term 
exposure to environmental factors. Consequently, some gametes 


have more than 46 chromosomes. In fact, it is believed that close 
these zygotes fail to develop and are spontaneously aborted by the 
mother’s body. 
do not divide evenly when they are forming. Therefore, some cells 
to half of all zygotes have an odd number of chromosomes. Most of 

One of the most common chromosomal abnormalities is on pair 
21. Trisomy 21 or Down syndrome occurs when there are three 
rather than two 21st chromosomes. A person with Down syndrome 
typically exhibits an intellectual disability and possesses certain 
physical features, such as short fingers and toes, folds of skin over 
the eyes, and a protruding tongue. There is as much variation in 
people with Down syndrome as in most populations, and those 
differences need to be recognized and appreciated. Other less 
common chromosomal abnormalities of live-born infants occur on 
chromosome 13 and chromosome 18. 


When the abnormality is on the 23rd pair the result is a sex-linked 
chromosomal abnormality. A person might have XXY, XYY, XXX, 
XO. Two of the more common sex-linked chromosomal disorders 
are Turner syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome. Turner syndrome 
occurs when part or all of one of the X chromosomes is lost and the 
resulting zygote has an XO composition. This occurs in 1 of every 
2,500 live female births (Carroll, 2007) and affects the individual’s 
cognitive functioning and sexual maturation. The external genitalia 
appears normal, but breasts and ovaries do not develop fully and 
the woman does not menstruate. Turner’s syndrome also results 
in short stature and other physical characteristics. Klinefelter 
syndrome (XXY) results when an extra X chromosome is present 
in the cells of a male and occurs in 1 out of 650 live male births. 
The Y chromosome stimulates the growth of male genitalia, but the 
additional X chromosome inhibits this development. An individual 
with Klinefelter syndrome typically has small testes, some breast 
development, infertility, and low levels of testosterone (National 
Institutes of Health, 2019). 

Genetic Counseling: A service that assists individuals identify, test 
for, and explain potential genetic conditions that could adversely 


affect themselves or their offspring is referred to as genetic 
counseling (CDC, 2015b). The common reasons for genetic 
counseling include: 

Family history of a genetic condition 
Membership in a certain ethnic group with a higher risk of a 
genetic condition 
Information regarding the results of genetic testing, including 
blood tests, amniocentesis, or ultra sounds 
Learning about the chances of having a baby with a genetic 
condition if the parents are older, have had several 
miscarriages, have offspring with birth defects, experience 
infertility, or have a medical condition 


Behavioral Genetics 

Behavioral Genetics is the scientific study of the interplay between 
the genetic and environmental contributions to behavior. Often 
referred to as nature/nurture debate, Gottlieb (1998, 2000, 2002) 
suggests an analytic framework for this debate that recognizes the 
interplay between the environment, behavior, and genetic 
expression. This bidirectional interplay suggests that the 
environment can affect the expression of genes just as genetic 
predispositions can impact a person’s potentials. Additionally, 
environmental circumstances can trigger symptoms of a genetic 
disorder. For example, a person who has sickle cell anemia, a 
recessive gene linked disorder, can experience a sickle cell crisis 
under conditions of oxygen deprivation. Someone predisposed 
genetically for type-two diabetes can trigger the disease through 
poor diet and little exercise. 

Research has shown how the environment and genotype interact 
in several ways. Genotype- Environment Correlations refer to the 
processes by which genetic factors contribute to variations in the 


environment (Plomin, DeFries, Knopik, & Niederhiser, 2013). There 
are three types of genotype-environment correlations: 

Passive genotype-environment correlation occurs when children 
passively inherit the genes and the environments their family 
provides. Certain behavioral characteristics, such as being 
athletically inclined, may run in families. The children have inherited 
both the genes that would enable success at these activities, and 
given the environmental encouragement to engage in these actions. 

Evocative genotype-environment correlation refers to how the 
social environment reacts to individuals based on their inherited 
characteristics. For example, whether one has a more outgoing or 
shy temperament will affect how he or she is treated by others. 

Active genotype-environment correlation occurs when 
individuals seek out environments that support their genetic 
tendencies. This is also referred to as niche picking. For example, 
children who are musically inclined seek out music instruction and 
opportunities that facilitate their natural musical ability. 

Conversely, Genotype-Environment Interactions involve genetic 
susceptibility to the environment. Adoption studies provide 
evidence for genotype-environment interactions. For example, the 
Early Growth and Development Study (Leve, Neiderhiser, 
Scaramella, & Reiss, 2010) followed 360 adopted children and their 


adopted and biological parents in a longitudinal study. Results have 
shown that children whose biological parents exhibited 
psychopathology, exhibited significantly fewer behavior problems 
when their adoptive parents used more structured parenting than 
unstructured. Additionally, elevated psychopathology in adoptive 
parents increased the risk for the children’s development of 
behavior problems, but only when the biological parents’ 
psychopathology was high. Consequently, the results show how 
environmental effects on behavior differ based on the genotype, 
especially stressful environments on genetically at-risk children. 

Lastly, Epigenetics studies modifications in DNA that affect gene 
expression and are passed on when the cells divide. Environmental 
factors, such as nutrition, stress, and teratogens are thought to 
change gene expression by switching genes on and off. These gene 
changes can then be inherited by daughter cells. This would explain 
why monozygotic or identical twins may increasingly differ in gene 
expression with age. For example, Fraga et al. (2005) found that 
when examining differences in DNA, a group of monozygotic twins 
were indistinguishable during the early years. However, when the 
twins were older there were significant discrepancies in their gene 
expression, most likely due to different experiences. These 
differences included susceptibilities to disease and a range of 
personal characteristics. 

The Human Genome Project: In 1990 the Human Genome Project 
(HGP), an international scientific endeavor, began the task of 
sequencing the 3 billion base pairs that make up the human genome. 
In April of 2003, more than two years ahead of schedule, scientists 
gave us the genetic blueprint for building a human. Since then, 
using the information from the HGP, researchers have discovered 
the genes involved in over 1800 diseases. In 2005 the HGP amassed 
a large database called HapMap that catalogs the genetic variations 
in 11 global populations. Data on genetic variation can improve our 
understanding of differential risk for disease and reactions to 
medical treatments, such as drugs. Pharmacogenomic researchers 
have already developed tests to determine whether a patient will 


respond favorably to certain drugs used in the treatment of breast 
cancer, lung cancer or HIV by using information from HapMap (NIH, 
2015). 
Future directions for the HGP include identifying the genetic 
markers for all 50 major forms of cancer (The Cancer Genome Atlas), 
continued use of the HapMap for creating more effective drugs for 
the treatment of disease, and examining the legal, social and ethical 
implications of genetic knowledge (NIH, 2015). 
From the outset, the HGP made ethical issues one of their main 
concerns. Part of the HGP’s budget supports research and holds 
workshops that address these concerns. Who owns this 
information, and how the availability of genetic information may 
influence healthcare and its impact on individuals, their families, 
and the greater community are just some of the many questions 
being addressed (NIH, 2015). 

Prenatal Development 

Now we turn our attention to prenatal development which is 
divided into three periods: The germinal period, the embryonic 
period, and the fetal period. The following is an overview of some of 
the changes that take place during each period. 


The Germinal Period 

The germinal period (about 14 days in length) lasts from conception 
to implantation of the fertilized egg in the lining of the uterus. At 
ejaculation, millions of sperm are released into the vagina, but only 
a few reach the egg and typically only one fertilizes the egg. Once 
a single sperm has entered the wall of the egg, the wall becomes 
hard and prevents other sperm from entering. After the sperm has 
entered the egg, the tail of the sperm breaks off and the head of the 
sperm, containing the genetic information from the father, unites 
with the nucleus of the egg. It is typically fertilized in the top section 
of the fallopian tube and continues its journey to the uterus. As 
a result, a new cell is formed. This cell, containing the combined 
genetic information from both parents, is referred to as a zygote. 

During this time, the organism begins cell division through 
mitosis. After five days of mitosis, there are 100 cells, which is now 


called a blastocyst. The blastocyst consists of both an inner and an 
outer group of cells. The inner group of cells or embryonic disk will 
become the embryo, while the outer group of cells, or trophoblast, 
becomes the support system that nourishes the developing 
organism. This stage ends when the blastocyst fully implants into 
the uterine wall (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2015a). 
Approximately 50-75% of blastocysts do not implant in the uterine 
wall (Betts et al., 2019). 

Mitosis is a fragile process and fewer than one-half of all zygotes 
survive beyond the first two weeks (Hall, 2004). Some of the reasons 
for this include the egg and sperm do not join properly, thus their 
genetic material does not combine, there is too little or damaged 
genetic material, the zygote does not replicate, or the blastocyst 
does not implant into the uterine wall. The failure rate is higher for 
in vitro conceptions. 


The Embryonic Period 

Starting the third week the blastocyst has implanted in the uterine 
wall. Upon implantation, this multi-cellular organism is called an 
embryo. Now blood vessels grow forming the placenta. The 
placenta is a structure connected to the uterus that provides 
nourishment and oxygen from the mother to the developing embryo 
via the umbilical cord. During this period, cells continue to 
differentiate. Growth during prenatal development occurs in two 
major directions: from head to tail called cephalocaudal 
development and from the midline outward referred to as 
proximodistal development. This means that those structures 
nearest the head develop before those nearest the feet and those 
structures nearest the torso develop before those away from the 
center of the body (such as hands and fingers). The head develops 
in the fourth week and the precursor to the heart begins to pulse. 
In the early stages of the embryonic period, gills and a tail are 
apparent. However, by the end of this stage, they disappear and 
the organism takes on a more human appearance. Some organisms 
fail during the embryonic period, usually due to gross chromosomal 
abnormalities. As in the case of the germinal period, often the 
mother does not yet know that she is pregnant. It is during this 
stage that the major structures of the body are taking form making 
the embryonic period the time when the organism is most 
vulnerable to the greatest amount of damage if exposed to harmful 
substances. Potential mothers are not often aware of the risks they 
introduce to the developing embryo during this time. The embryo 
is approximately 1 inch in length and weighs about 8 grams at the 
end of eight weeks (Betts et al., 2019). The embryo can move and 
respond to touch at this time. 


The Fetal Period 

From the ninth week until birth, the organism is referred to as 
a fetus. During this stage, the major structures are continuing to 
develop. By the third month, the fetus has all its body parts 
including external genitalia. In the following weeks, the fetus will 
develop hair, nails, teeth and the excretory and digestive systems 
will continue to develop. The fetus is about 3 inches long and weighs 
about 28 grams. 

During the 4th – 6th months, the eyes become more sensitive 
to light and hearing develops. The respiratory system continues to 
develop, and reflexes such as sucking, swallowing and hiccupping, 
develop during the 5th month. Cycles of sleep and wakefulness are 
present at this time as well. The first chance of survival outside 
the womb, known as the age of viability is reached at about 24 
weeks (Morgan, Goldenberg, & Schulkin, 2008). Many practitioners 
hesitate to resuscitate before 24 weeks. The majority of the neurons 


in the brain have developed by 24 weeks, although they are still 
rudimentary, and the glial or nurse cells that support neurons 
continue to grow. At 24 weeks the fetus can feel pain (Royal College 
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1997). 

Between the 7th – 9th months, the fetus is primarily preparing for 
birth. It is exercising its muscles and its lungs begin to expand and 
contract. The fetus gains about 5 pounds and 7 inches during this 
last trimester of pregnancy, and during the 8th month, a layer of fat 
develops under the skin. This layer of fat serves as insulation and 
helps the baby regulate body temperature after birth. 

At around 36 weeks the fetus is almost ready for birth. It weighs 
about 6 pounds and is about 18.5 inches long. By week 37 all of the 


fetus’s organ systems are developed enough that it could survive 
outside the mother’s uterus without many of the risks associated 
with premature birth. The fetus continues to gain weight and grow 
in length until approximately 40 weeks. By then the fetus has very 
little room to move around and birth becomes imminent. 

Prenatal Brain Development 

Prenatal brain development begins in the third gestational week 


ridges appear along the neural plate first forming the neural groove 
with the differentiation of stem cells, which are capable of 
producing all the different cells that make up the brain (Stiles & 
Jernigan, 2010). The location of these stem cells in the embryo is 
referred to as the neural plate. By the end of the third week, two 
and then the neural tube. The open region in the center of the 
neural tube forms the brain’s ventricles and spinal canal. By the end 
of the embryonic period, or week eight, the neural tube has further 
differentiated into the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. 

Brain development during the fetal period involves neuron 
production, migration, and differentiation. From the early fetal 
period until midgestation, most of the 85 billion neurons have been 
generated and many have already migrated to their brain positions. 
Neurogenesis, or the formation of neurons, is largely completed 
after five months of gestation. One exception is in the hippocampus, 
which continues to develop neurons throughout life. Neurons that 
form the neocortex, or the layer of cells that lie on the surface of the 
brain, migrate to their location in an orderly way. Neural migration 
is mostly completed in the cerebral cortex by 24 weeks (Poduri & 
Volpe, 2018). Once in position, neurons begin to produce dendrites 
and axons that begin to form the neural networks responsible for 
information processing. Regions of the brain that contain the cell 
bodies are referred to as the gray matter because they look gray in 
appearance. The axons that form the neural pathways make up the 
white matter because they are covered in myelin, a fatty substance 
that is white in appearance. Myelin aids in both the insulation and 
efficiency of neural transmission. Although cell differentiation is 
complete at birth, the growth of dendrites, axons, and synapses 
continue for years. 

Teratogens 

Good prenatal care is essential. The developing child is most at risk 


for some of the severe problems during the first three months of 
development. Unfortunately, this is a time at which many mothers 
are unaware that they are pregnant. Today, we know many of the 
factors that can jeopardize the health of the developing child. The 
study of factors that contribute to birth defects is called teratology. 
Teratogens are environmental factors that can contribute to birth 
defects, and include some maternal diseases, pollutants, drugs and 
alcohol. 

Factors influencing prenatal risks: There are several 
considerations in determining the type and amount of damage that 
might result from exposure to a particular teratogen (Berger, 2005). 
These include: 

The timing of the exposure: Structures in the body are 
vulnerable to the most severe damage when they are forming. 
If a substance is introduced during a particular structure’s 
critical period (time of development), the damage to that 
structure may be greater. For example, the ears and arms 
reach their critical periods at about 6 weeks after conception. 
If a mother exposes the embryo to certain substances during 
this period, the arms and ears may be malformed. 
The amount of exposure: Some substances are not harmful 
unless the amounts reach a certain level. The critical level 
depends in part on the size and metabolism of the mother. 
The number of teratogens: Fetuses exposed to multiple 
teratogens typically have more problems than those exposed 
to only one. 
Genetics: Genetic make-up also plays a role in the impact a 
particular teratogen might have on the child. This is suggested 
by fraternal twins exposed to the same prenatal environment, 
but they do not experience the same teratogenic effects. The 
genetic make- up of the mother can also have an effect; some 
mothers may be more resistant to teratogenic effects than 
others. 
Being male or female: Males are more likely to experience 



damage due to teratogens than are females. It is believed that 
the Y chromosome, which contains fewer genes than the X, 
may have an impact. 


Alcohol: One of the most commonly used teratogens is alcohol, and 
because half of all pregnancies in the United States are unplanned, 
it is recommended that women of child-bearing age take great 
caution against drinking alcohol when not using birth control or 
when pregnant (CDC, 2005). Alcohol use during pregnancy is the 
leading preventable cause of intellectual disabilities in children in 
the United States (Maier & West, 2001). Alcohol consumption, 
particularly during the second month of prenatal development but 
at any point during pregnancy, may lead to neurocognitive and 
behavioral difficulties that can last a lifetime. 

In extreme cases, alcohol consumption during pregnancy can lead 
to fetal death, but also can result in Fetal Alcohol Spectrum 
Disorders (FASD), which is an umbrella term for the range of effects 
that can occur due to alcohol consumption during pregnancy 


of Dimes, 2016a). 
(March of Dimes, 2016a). The most severe form of FASD is Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome (FAS). Children with FAS share certain physical 
features such as flattened noses, small eye holes, and small heads. 
Cognitively, these children have poor judgment, poor impulse 
control, higher rates of ADHD, learning issues, and lower IQ scores. 
These developmental problems and delays persist into adulthood 
(Streissguth, Barr, Kogan, & Bookstein, 1996) and can include 
criminal behavior, psychiatric problems, and unemployment (CDC, 
2016a). Based on animal studies, it has been hypothesized that a 
mother’s alcohol consumption during pregnancy may predispose 
her child to like alcohol (Youngentob, Molina, Spear, & Youngentob, 
2007). Binge drinking, or 4 or more drinks in 2 to 3 hours, during 
pregnancy increases the chance of having a baby with FASD (March 

Tobacco: Another widely used teratogen is tobacco as more than 
7% of pregnant women smoked in 2016 (Someji & Beltrán-Sánchez, 
2019). According to Tong et al. (2013) in conjunction with the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, data from 27 sites in 
2010 representing 52% of live births, showed that among women 
with recent live births: 

About 23% reported smoking in the 3 months prior to 



pregnancy. 
Almost 11% reported smoking during pregnancy. 
More than half (54.3%) reported that they quit smoking by the 
last 3 months of pregnancy. 
Almost 16% reported smoking after delivery. 


When comparing the ages of women who smoked: 

Women <20, 13.6% smoked during pregnancy 
Women 20–24,17.6% smoked during pregnancy 
Women 25–34, 8.8% smoked during pregnancy 
Women ≥35, 5.7% smoked during pregnancy 


The findings among racial and ethnic groups indicated that smoking 
during pregnancy was highest among American Indians/Alaska 
Natives (26.0%) and lowest among Asians/Pacific Islanders (2.1%). 

When a pregnant woman smokes the fetus is exposed to 
dangerous chemicals including nicotine, carbon monoxide, and tar, 
which lessen the amount of oxygen available to the fetus. Oxygen is 
important for overall growth and development. Tobacco use during 
pregnancy has been associated with low birth weight, ectopic 
pregnancy (fertilized egg implants itself outside of the uterus), 
placenta previa (placenta lies low in the uterus and covers all or part 
of the cervix), placenta abruption (placenta separates prematurely 
from the uterine wall), preterm delivery, stillbirth, fetal growth 
restriction, sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), birth defects, 
learning disabilities, and early puberty in girls (Center for Disease 
Control, 2015d). 

A woman being exposed to secondhand smoke during pregnancy 
has also been linked to low- birth weight infants. In addition, 
exposure to thirdhand smoke, or toxins from tobacco smoke that 
linger on clothing, furniture, and in locations where smoking has 
occurred, results in a negative impact on infants’ lung development. 
Rehan, Sakurai, and Torday (2011) found that prenatal exposure to 


thirdhand smoke played a greater role in altered lung functioning in 
children than exposure postnatally. 

Prescription/Over-the-counter Drugs: About 70% of pregnant 
women take at least one prescription drug (March of Dimes, 2016e). 
A woman should not be taking any prescription drug during 
pregnancy unless it was prescribed by a health care provider who 
knows she is pregnant. Some prescription drugs can cause birth 
defects, problems in overall health, and development of the fetus. 
Over-the-counter drugs are also a concern during the prenatal 
period because they may cause certain health problems. For 
example, the pain reliever ibuprofen can cause serious blood flow 
problems to the fetus during the last three months. 

Illicit Drugs: Common illicit drugs include cocaine, ecstasy and 
other club drugs, heroin, marijuana, and prescription drugs that 
are abused. It is difficult to completely determine the effects of a 
particular illicit drug on a developing child because most mothers 
who use, use more than one substance and have other unhealthy 


have problems later in life, including learning and behavior 
difficulties, slower than normal growth, and die from sudden infant 
death syndrome. Children of substance abusing parents are also 
considered at high risk for a range of biological, developmental, 
academic, and behavioral problems, including developing substance 
abuse problems of their own (Conners, et al., 2003). 
behaviors. These include smoking, drinking alcohol, not eating 
healthy meals, and being more likely to get a sexually transmitted 
disease. However, several problems seem clear. The use of cocaine 
is connected with low birth weight, stillbirths and spontaneous 
abortion. Heavy marijuana use is associated with problems in brain 
development (March of Dimes, 2016c). If a baby’s mother used an 
addictive drug during pregnancy that baby can get addicted to the 
drug before birth and go through drug withdrawal after birth, also 
known as neonatal abstinence syndrome (March of Dimes, 2015d). 
Other complications of illicit drug use include premature birth, 
smaller than normal head size, birth defects, heart defects, and 
infections. Additionally, babies born to mothers who use drugs may 


Pollutants: There are more than 83,000 chemicals used in the 
United States with little information on the effects of them during 
pregnancy (March of Dimes, 2016b). 

Lead: An environmental pollutant of significant concern is lead 
poisoning, which has been linked to fertility problems, high 
blood pressure, low birth weight, prematurity, miscarriage, and 
slowed neurological development. Grossman and Slutsky (2017) 
found that babies born in Flint Michigan, an area identified 
with high lead levels in the drinking water, were premature, 



weighed less than average, and gained less weight than 
expected. 
Pesticides: The chemicals in certain pesticides are also 
potentially damaging and may lead to birth defects, learning 
problems, low birth weight, miscarriage, and premature birth 
(March of Dimes, 2014). 
Bisphenol A: Prenatal exposure to bisphenol A (BPA), a 
chemical commonly used in plastics and food and beverage 
containers, may disrupt the action of certain genes 
contributing to certain birth defects (March of Dimes, 2016b). 
Radiation: If a mother is exposed to radiation, it can get into 
the bloodstream and pass through the umbilical cord to the 
baby. Radiation can also build up in body areas close to the 
uterus, such as the bladder. Exposure to radiation can slow the 
baby’s growth, cause birth defects, affect brain development, 
cause cancer, and result in a miscarriage. 
Mercury: Mecury, a heavy metal, can cause brain damage and 
affect the baby’s hearing and vision. This is why women are 
cautioned about the amount and type of fish they consume 
during pregnancy. 


Toxoplasmosis: The tiny parasite, toxoplasma gondii, causes an 
infection called toxoplasmosis. According to the March of Dimes 
(2012d), toxoplasma gondii infects more than 60 million people in 
the United States. A healthy immune system can keep the parasite at 
bay producing no symptoms, so most people do not know they are 
infected. As a routine prenatal screening frequently does not test for 
the presence of this parasite, pregnant women may want to talk to 
their health-care provider about being tested. 


Toxoplasmosis can cause premature birth, stillbirth, and can result 
in birth defects to the eyes and brain. While most babies born with 
this infection show no symptoms, ten percent may experience eye 
infections, enlarged liver and spleen, jaundice, and pneumonia. To 
avoid being infected, women should avoid eating undercooked or 
raw meat and unwashed fruits and vegetables, touching cooking 
utensils that touched raw meat or unwashed fruits and vegetables, 
and touching cat feces, soil or sand. If women think they may have 
been infected during pregnancy, they should have their baby tested. 

Sexually Transmitted Diseases: Gonorrhea, syphilis, and 
chlamydia are sexually transmitted infections that can be passed to 
the fetus by an infected mother. Mothers should be tested as early 
as possible to minimize the risk of spreading these infections to 
their unborn child. Additionally, the earlier the treatment begins, 
the better the health outcomes for mother and baby (CDC, 2016d). 
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) can cause premature birth, 
premature rupture of the amniotic sac, an ectopic pregnancy, birth 
defects, miscarriage, and still births (March of Dimes, 2013). Most 
babies become infected with STDS while passing through the birth 


canal during delivery, but some STDs can cross the placenta and 
infect the developing fetus. 

Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV): One of the most 
potentially devastating teratogens is HIV. HIV and Acquired Immune 
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) are leading causes of illness and death 
in the United States (Health Resources and Services Administration, 
2015). One of the main ways children under age 13 become infected 
with HIV is via mother-to-child transmission of the virus prenatally, 
during labor, or by breastfeeding (CDC, 2016c). There are some 
measures that can be taken to lower the chance the child will 
contract the disease. HIV positive mothers who take antiviral 
medications during their pregnancy greatly reduce the chance of 
passing the virus to the fetus. The risk of transmission is less than 
2 percent; in contrast, it is 25 percent if the mother does not take 
antiretroviral drugs (CDC, 2016b). However, the long-term risks of 
prenatal exposure to the medication are not known. It is 
recommended that women with HIV deliver the child by c-section, 
and that after birth they avoid breast feeding. 

German measles (or rubella): Rubella, also called German 
measles, is an infection that causes mild flu-like symptoms and a 
rash on the skin. However, only about half of children infected have 
these symptoms, while others have no symptoms (March of Dimes, 
2012a). Rubella has been associated with a number of birth defects. 
If the mother contracts the disease during the first three months 
of pregnancy, damage can occur in the eyes, ears, heart or brain 
of the unborn child. Deafness is almost certain if the mother has 
German measles before the 11th week of prenatal development and 
can also cause brain damage. Women in the United States are much 
less likely to be afflicted with rubella, because most women received 
childhood vaccinations that protect her from the disease. 


Maternal Factors 

Mothers over 35: Most women over 35 who become pregnant are 
in good health and have healthy pregnancies. However, according to 
the March of Dimes (2016d), women over age 35 are more likely to 
have an increased risk of: 

Fertility problems 
High blood pressure 
Diabetes 
Miscarriages 
Placenta Previa 
Cesarean section 
Premature birth 
Stillbirth 
A baby with a genetic disorder or other birth defects 


Because a woman is born with all her eggs, environmental 
teratogens can affect the quality of the eggs as women get older. 
Also, a woman’s reproductive system ages which can adversely 
affect the pregnancy. Some women over 35 choose special prenatal 
screening tests, such as a maternal blood screening, to determine if 
there are any health risks for the baby. 


Although there are medical concerns associated with having a child 
later in life, there are also many positive consequences to being 
a more mature parent. Older parents are more confident, less 
stressed, and typically married providing family stability. Their 
children perform better on math and reading tests, and they are 
less prone to injuries or emotional troubles (Albert, 2013). Women 
who choose to wait are often well educated and lead healthy lives. 
According to Gregory (2007), older women are more stable, 
demonstrate a stronger family focus, possess greater self-
confidence, and have more money. Having a child later in one’s 
career equals overall higher wages. In fact, for every year a woman 
delays motherhood, she makes 9% more in lifetime earnings. Lastly, 
women who delay having children actually live longer. Sun et al. 
(2015) found that women who had their last child after the age of 33 
doubled their chances of living to age 95 or older than women who 
had their last child before their 30th birthday. A woman’s natural 
ability to have a child at a later age indicates that her reproductive 
system is aging slowly, and consequently so is the rest of her body. 


Teenage Pregnancy: A teenage mother is at a greater risk for 
having pregnancy complications including anemia, and high blood 
pressure. These risks are even greater for those under age 15. 
Infants born to teenage mothers have a higher risk for being 
premature and having low birthweight or other serious health 
problems. Premature and low birthweight babies may have organs 
that are not fully developed which can result in breathing problems, 
bleeding in the brain, vision loss, and serious intestinal problems. 
Very low birthweight babies (less than 3 1/3 pounds) are more 
than 100 times as likely to die, and moderately low birthweight 
babies (between 3 1/3 and 5 ½ pounds) are more than 5 times as 
likely to die in their first year, than normal weight babies (March of 
Dimes, 2012c). Again, the risk is highest for babies of mothers under 
age 15. Reasons for these health issues include that teenagers are 
the least likely of all age groups to get early and regular prenatal 
care. Additionally, they may engage in negative behaviors including 
eating unhealthy food, smoking, drinking alcohol, and taking drugs. 
Additional concerns for teenagers are repeat births. About 25% of 
teen mothers under age 18 have a second baby within 2 years after 
the first baby’s birth. 

Gestational Diabetes: Seven percent of pregnant women develop 
gestational diabetes (March of Dimes, 2015b). Diabetes is a condition 
where the body has too much glucose in the bloodstream. Most 
pregnant women have their glucose level tested at 24 to 28 weeks of 
pregnancy. Gestational diabetes usually goes away after the mother 
gives birth, but it might indicate a risk for developing diabetes later 
in life. If untreated, gestational diabetes can cause premature birth, 
stillbirth, the baby having breathing problems at birth, jaundice, or 
low blood sugar. Babies born to mothers with gestational diabetes 
can also be considerably heavier (more than 9 pounds) making the 
labor and birth process more difficult. For expectant mothers, 
untreated gestational diabetes can cause preeclampsia (high blood 
pressure and signs that the liver and kidneys may not be working 
properly) discussed later in the chapter. Risk factors for gestational 
diabetes include age (being over age 25), being overweight or 


gaining too much weight during pregnancy, family history of 
diabetes, having had gestational diabetes with a prior pregnancy, 
and race and ethnicity (African-American, Native American, 
Hispanic, Asian, or Pacific Islander have a higher risk). Eating 
healthy and maintaining a healthy weight during pregnancy can 
reduce the chance of gestational diabetes. Women who already have 
diabetes and become pregnant need to attend all their prenatal 
care visits, and follow the same advice as those for women with 
gestational diabetes as the risk of preeclampsia, premature birth, 
birth defects, and stillbirth are the same. 

High Blood Pressure (Hypertension): Hypertension is a condition 
in which the pressure against the wall of the arteries becomes too 
high. There are two types of high blood pressure during pregnancy, 
gestational and chronic. Gestational hypertension only occurs 
during pregnancy and goes away after birth. Chronic high blood 
pressure refers to women who already had hypertension before 
the pregnancy or to those who developed it during pregnancy and 
it continued after birth. According to the March of Dimes (2015c) 
about 8 in every 100 pregnant women have high blood pressure. 
High blood pressure during pregnancy can cause premature birth 
and low birth weight (under five and a half pounds), placental 
abruption, and mothers can develop preeclampsia. 

Rh Disease: Rh is a protein found in the blood. Most people are 
Rh positive, meaning they have this protein. Some people are Rh 
negative, meaning this protein is absent. Mothers who are Rh 
negative are at risk of having a baby with a form of anemia called 
Rh disease (March of Dimes, 2009). A father who is Rh-positive 
and mother who is Rh-negative can conceive a baby who is Rh-
positive. Some of the fetus’s blood cells may get into the mother’s 
bloodstream and her immune system is unable to recognize the Rh 
factor. The immune system starts to produce antibodies to fight 
off what it thinks is a foreign invader. Once her body produces 
immunity, the antibodies can cross the placenta and start to destroy 
the red blood cells of the developing fetus. As this process takes 
time, often the first Rh positive baby is not harmed, but as the 


mother’s body will continue to produce antibodies to the Rh factor 
across her lifetime, subsequent pregnancies can pose greater risk 
for an Rh positive baby. In the newborn, Rh disease can lead to 
jaundice, anemia, heart failure, brain damage and death. 

Weight Gain during Pregnancy: According to March of Dimes 
(2016f) during pregnancy most women need only an additional 300 
calories per day to aid in the growth of the fetus. Gaining too little 
or too much weight during pregnancy can be harmful. Women who 
gain too little may have a baby who is low-birth weight, while those 
who gain too much are likely to have a premature or large baby. 
There is also a greater risk for the mother developing preeclampsia 
and diabetes, which can cause further problems during the 
pregnancy. Putting on the weight slowly is best. Mothers who are 
concerned about their weight gain should talk to their health care 
provider. 

Stress: Feeling stressed is common during pregnancy, but high 
levels of stress can cause complications including having a 
premature baby or a low-birthweight baby. Babies born early or too 
small are at an increased risk for health problems. Stress-related 
hormones may cause these complications by affecting a woman’s 
immune systems resulting in an infection and premature birth. 
Additionally, some women deal with stress by smoking, drinking 
alcohol, or taking drugs, which can lead to problems in the 
pregnancy. High levels of stress in pregnancy have also been 


correlated with problems in the baby’s brain development and 
immune system functioning, as well as childhood problems such as 
trouble paying attention and being afraid (March of Dimes, 2012b). 

Depression: Depression is a significant medical condition in 
which feelings of sadness, worthlessness, guilt, and fatigue interfere 
with one’s daily functioning. Depression can occur before, during, 
or after pregnancy, and 1 in 7 women is treated for depression 
sometime between the year before pregnancy and year after 
pregnancy (March of Dimes, 2015a). Women who have experienced 
depression previously are more likely to have depression during 
pregnancy. Consequences of depression include the baby being 
born premature, having a low birthweight, being more irritable, less 
active, less attentive, and having fewer facial expressions. About 
13% of pregnant women take an antidepressant during pregnancy. It 
is important that women taking antidepressants during pregnancy 
discuss the medication with a health care provider as some 
medications can cause harm to the developing organism. In fact, 
birth defects happen about 2 to 3 times more often in women 
who are prescribed certain Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors 
(SSRIs) for their depression. 

Paternal Impact: The age of fathers at the time of conception 
is also an important factor in health risks for children. According 
to Nippoldt (2015) offspring of men over 40 face an increased risk 
of miscarriages, autism, birth defects, achondroplasia (bone growth 
disorder) and schizophrenia. These increased health risks are 
thought to be due to accumulated chromosomal aberrations and 
mutations during the maturation of sperm cells in older men (Bray, 
Gunnell, & Smith, 2006). However, like older women, the overall 
risks are small. 


In addition, men are more likely than women to work in occupations 
where hazardous chemicals, many of which have teratogenic effects 
or may cause genetic mutations, are used (Cordier, 2008). These 
may include petrochemicals, lead, and pesticides that can cause 
abnormal sperm and lead to miscarriages or diseases. Men are also 
more likely to be a source of secondhand smoke for their developing 
offspring. As noted earlier, smoking by either the mother or around 
the mother can hinder prenatal development. 

Prenatal Assessment 

A number of assessments are suggested to women as part of their 
routine prenatal care to find conditions that may increase the risk 
of complications for the mother and fetus (Eisenberg, Murkoff, & 
Hathaway, 1996). These can include blood and urine analyses and 
screening and diagnostic tests for birth defects. 


Ultrasound is one of the main screening tests done in combination 
with blood tests. The ultrasound is a test in which sound waves 
are used to examine the fetus. There are two general types. 
Transvaginal ultrasounds are used in early pregnancy, while 
transabdominal ultrasounds are more common and used after 10 
weeks of pregnancy (typically, 16 to 20 weeks). Ultrasounds are 
used to check the fetus for defects or problems. It can also find 
out the age of the fetus, location of the placenta, fetal position, 
movement, breathing and heart rate, amount of amniotic fluid, and 
number of fetuses. Most women have at least one ultra sound during 
pregnancy, but if problems are noted, additional ultrasounds may be 
recommended. 


When diagnosis of a birth defect is necessary, ultrasounds help 
guide the more invasive diagnostic tests of amniocentesis and 
chorionic villus sampling. 
Amniocentesis is a procedure in which a needle is used to withdraw 
a small amount of amniotic fluid and cells from the sac surrounding 
the fetus and later tested. Chorionic Villus Sampling is a procedure 
in which a small sample of cells is taken from the placenta and 
tested. Both amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling have a risk 
of miscarriage, and consequently they are not done routinely. 


Complications of Pregnancy 

Minor complications: There are a number of common side effects 


to say that these problems are not potentially very uncomfortable. 
These side effects include nausea (particularly during the first 3-4 
of pregnancy. Not everyone experiences all of these, nor to the 
same degree. And although they are considered “minor” this is not 
months of pregnancy as a result of higher levels of estrogen in 
the system), heartburn, gas, hemorrhoids, backache, leg cramps, 
insomnia, constipation, shortness of breath or varicose veins (as a 
result of carrying a heavy load on the abdomen). 

Major Complications: The following are some serious 
complications of pregnancy which can pose health risks to mother 
and child and that often require hospitalization. 

Ectopic Pregnancy occurs when the zygote becomes attached 
to the fallopian tube before reaching the uterus. About 1 in 50 
pregnancies in the United States are tubal pregnancies and this 
number has been increasing because of the higher rates of pelvic 
inflammatory disease and Chlamydia (Carroll, 2007). Abdominal 
pain, vaginal bleeding, nausea and fainting are symptoms of ectopic 
pregnancy. 

Preeclampsia, also known as Toxemia, is characterized by a sharp 
rise in blood pressure, a leakage of protein into the urine as a 
result of kidney problems, and swelling of the hands, feet, and face 
during the third trimester of pregnancy. Preeclampsia is the most 
common complication of pregnancy. It is estimated to affect 5% 
to 10% of all pregnancies globally and accounts for 40% to 60% 
of maternal deaths in developing countries (National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, 2013). Rates are lower in the 
United States and preeclampsia affects about 3% to 5% of pregnant 
women. 

Preeclampsia occurs most frequently in first pregnancies, and it 
is more common in women who are obese, have diabetes, or are 
carrying twins. When preeclampsia causes seizures, the condition is 
known as eclampsia, which is the second leading cause of maternal 
death in the United States. Preeclampsia is also a leading cause 
of fetal complications, which include low birth weight, premature 


birth, and stillbirth. Treatment is typically bed rest and sometimes 
medication. If this treatment is ineffective, labor may be induced. 

Maternal Mortality: Acording to the CDC (2019), about 700 
American women die from complications related to pregnancy each 
year, and this number is rising. Further, 60% of those deaths could 
have been prevented. Bleeding, infections, and heart-related 
problems are the main causes. Possible contributing factors include 
the high caesarean section rate and obesity. Compared to other 
developed nations, this number is considered high. Approximately 
1000 women die in childbirth around the world each day (World 
Health Organization, 2010). Rates are highest in Subsaharan Africa 
and South Asia, although there has been a substantial decrease in 
these rates. The campaign to make childbirth safe for everyone has 
led to the development of clinics accessible to those living in more 
isolated areas and training more midwives to assist in childbirth. 

Spontaneous abortion is experienced in an estimated 20-40 
percent of undiagnosed pregnancies and in another 10 percent of 
diagnosed pregnancies. Usually the body aborts due to 
chromosomal abnormalities, and this typically happens before the 
12th week of pregnancy. Cramping and bleeding result and normal 
periods return after several months. Some women are more likely 
to have repeated miscarriages due to chromosomal, amniotic, or 
hormonal problems, but miscarriage can also be a result of defective 
sperm (Carrell et. al., 2003). 

Birth 

Preparation for Childbirth 

Prepared childbirth refers to being not only in good physical 
condition to help provide a healthy environment for the baby to 


develop, but also helping individuals to prepare to accept their new 
roles as parents. Additionally, parents can receive information and 
training that will assist them for delivery and life with the baby. The 
more future parents can learn about childbirth and the newborn, 
the better prepared they will be for the adjustment they must make 
to a new life. 

One of the most common methods for preparing for childbirth 
is The Lamaze Method. This method originated in Russia and was 
brought to the United States in the 1950s by Fernand Lamaze. The 
emphasis of this method is on teaching the woman to be in control 
in the process of delivery. It includes learning muscle relaxation, 
breathing though contractions, having a focal point (usually a 
picture to look at) during contractions and having a support person 
who goes through the training process with the mother and serves 
as a coach during delivery (Eisenberg, Murkoff, & Hathaway, 1996). 

Choosing Where to Have the Baby and Who Will Deliver: The 
vast majority of births occur in a hospital setting. However, one 
percent of women choose to deliver at home (Martin, Hamilton, 
Osterman, Curtin, & Mathews, 2015). Women who are at low risk for 
birth complications can successfully deliver at home. More than half 
(67%) of home deliveries are by certified nurse midwifes. Midwives 
are trained and licensed to assist in delivery and are far less 
expensive than the cost of a hospital delivery. However, because 
of the potential for a complication during the birth process, most 
medical professionals recommend that delivery take place in a 
hospital. Despite the concerns, in the United States women who 
have had previous children, who are over 25, and who are white are 
more likely to have out-of-hospital births (MacDorman, Menacker, 
& Declercq, 2010). In addition to home births, one-third of out-
of-hospital births occur in freestanding clinics, birthing centers, in 
physician’s offices, or other locations. 


Stages of Birth for Vaginal Delivery 


The First Stage of labor begins with uterine contractions that may 
initially last about 30 seconds and be spaced 15 to 20 minutes apart. 
These increase in duration and frequency to more than a minute 
in length and about 3 to 4 minutes apart. Typically, doctors advise 
that they be called when contractions are coming about every 5 
minutes. Some women experience false labor or Braxton-Hicks 
contractions, especially with the first child. These may come and 
go. They tend to diminish when the mother begins walking around. 
Real labor pains tend to increase with walking. Labor may also be 
signaled by a bloody discharge being expelled from the cervix. In 
one out of 8 pregnancies, the amniotic sac or water in which the 
fetus is suspended may break before labor begins. In such cases, the 
physician may induce labor with the use of medication if it does not 
begin on its own in order to reduce the risk of infection. Normally 
this sac does not rupture until the later stages of labor. 

The first stage of labor is typically the longest. During this stage 
the cervix or opening to the uterus dilates to 10 centimeters or just 
under 4 inches. This may take around 12-16 hours for first children 
or about 6-9 hours for women who have previously given birth. 
Labor may also begin with a discharge of blood or amniotic fluid. 

The Second Stage involves the passage of the baby through the 
birth canal. This stage takes about 10-40 minutes. Contractions 
usually come about every 2-3 minutes. The mother pushes and 
relaxes as directed by the medical staff. Normally the head is 
delivered first. The baby is then rotated so that one shoulder can 
come through and then the other shoulder. The rest of the baby 
quickly passes through. At this stage, an episiotomy or incision 
made in the tissue between the vaginal opening and anus, may be 
performed to avoid tearing the tissue of the back of the vaginal 
opening (Mayo Clinic, 2016). The baby’s mouth and nose are 
suctioned out. The umbilical cord is clamped and cut. 

The Third Stage is relatively painless. During this stage, the 
placenta or afterbirth is delivered. This is typically within 20 
minutes after delivery. If an episiotomy was performed it is stitched 
up during this stage. 


More than 50% of women giving birth at hospitals use an epidural 
anesthesia during delivery (American Pregnancy Association, 2015). 
An epidural block is a regional analgesic that can be used during 
labor and alleviates most pain in the lower body without slowing 
labor. The epidural block can be used throughout labor and has little 
to no effect on the baby. Medication is injected into a small space 
outside the spinal cord in the lower back. It takes 10 to 20 minutes 
for the medication to take effect. An epidural block with stronger 
medications, such as anesthetics, can be used shortly before a C-
section or if a vaginal birth requires the use of forceps or vacuum 
extraction. 

A Cesarean section (C-section) is surgery to deliver the baby by 
being removed through the mother’s abdomen. In the United States, 
about one in three women have their babies delivered this way 
(Martin et al., 2015). Most C-sections are done when problems occur 
during delivery unexpectedly. These can include: 
Health problems in the mother 
Signs of distress in the baby 
Not enough room for the baby to go through the vagina 
The position of the baby, such as a breech presentation where the 
head is not in the downward position 

C-sections are also more common among women carrying more 
than one baby. Although the surgery is relatively safe for mother 
and baby, it is considered major surgery and carries health risks. 
Additionally, it also takes longer to recover from a C-section than 
from vaginal birth. After healing, the incision may leave a weak 
spot in the wall of the uterus. This could cause problems with an 
attempted vaginal birth later. However, more than half of women 
who have a C-section can have a vaginal birth later. 

Induced birth: Sometimes a baby’s arrival may need to be induced 
or delivered before labor begins. Inducing labor may be 
recommended for a variety of reasons when there is concern for the 
health of the mother or baby. For example: 
The mother is approaching two weeks beyond her due date and 
labor has not started naturally 


The mother’s water has broken, but contractions have not begun 
There is an infection in the mother’s uterus 
The baby has stopped growing at the expected pace 
There is not enough amniotic fluid surrounding the baby 
The placenta peels away, either partially or completely, from the 
inner wall of the uterus before delivery 
The mother has a medical condition that might put her or her baby 
at risk, such as high blood pressure or diabetes (Mayo Clinic, 2014) 

Assessing the Neonate 

The Apgar assessment is conducted one minute and five minutes 
after birth. 
This is a very quick way to assess the newborn’s overall condition. 
Five measures are assessed: Heart rate, respiration, muscle tone 
(assessed by touching the baby’s palm), reflex response (the Babinski 
reflex is tested), and color. A score of 0 to 2 is given on each feature 
examined. An Apgar of 5 or less is cause for concern. The second 
Apgar should indicate improvement with a higher score. 


Another way to assess the condition of the newborn is the Neonatal 
Behavioral Assessment Scale (NBAS). The baby’s motor 
development, muscle tone, and stress response are assessed. This 
tool has been used around the world to further assess the newborn, 
especially those with low Apgar scores, and to make comparisons of 
infants in different cultures (Brazelton & Nugent, 1995). 


Problems of the Newborn 

Anoxia: Anoxia is a temporary lack of oxygen to the brain. Difficulty 
during delivery may lead to anoxia which can result in brain damage 
or in severe cases, death. Babies who suffer both low birth weight 
and anoxia are more likely to suffer learning disabilities later in life 
as well. 

Low Birth weight: We have been discussing a number of teratogens 
associated with low birth weight such as alcohol, tobacco, etc. A 
child is considered low birth weight if he or she weighs less than 
5 pounds 8 ounces (2500 grams). About 8.2 percent of babies born 
in the United States are of low birth weight (Center for Disease 
Control, 2015a). A low birth weight baby has difficulty maintaining 
adequate body temperature because it lacks the fat that would 
otherwise provide insulation. Such a baby is also at more risk for 
infection, and 67 percent of these babies are also preterm which 
can make them more at risk for respiratory infection. Very low birth 


weight babies (2 pounds or less) have an increased risk of developing 
cerebral palsy. 

Additionally, Pettersson, Larsson, D’Onofrio, Almqvist, and 
Lichtenstein (2019) analyzed fetal growth and found that reduced 
birth weight was correlated with a small, but significant increase 
in several psychiatric disorders in adulthood. These included: 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism, depression, and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Pettersson et al. theorized that 
“reduced fetal growth compromises brain development during a 
critical period, which in turn slightly increases the risk not only 
for neurodevelopmental disorders but also for virtually all mental 
health conditions” (p. 540). An insufficient supply of oxygen and 
nutrients for the developing fetus are proposed as factors that 
increased the risk for neurodevelopmental disorders. 

Preterm: A newborn might also have a low birth weight if it is 
born at less than 37 weeks gestation, which qualifies it as a preterm 
baby (CDC, 2015c). Early birth can be triggered by anything that 
disrupts the mother’s system. For instance, vaginal infections can 
lead to premature birth because such infection causes the mother 
to release anti-inflammatory chemicals which, in turn, can trigger 
contractions. Smoking and the use of other teratogens can lead to 
preterm 
birth. The earlier a woman quits smoking, the lower the chance that 
the baby will be born preterm (Someji & Beltrán-Sánchez, 2019). 
A significant consequence of preterm birth includes respiratory 
distress syndrome, which is characterized by weak and irregular 
breathing (United States National Library of Medicine, 2015b). 

Saybie (name given to her by the hospital), a baby girl born in San 
Diego, California is now considered the world’s smallest baby ever 
to survive (Chiu, 2019). She was born in December 2018 at 23 weeks 
and 3 days weighing only 8.6 ounces (same size as an apple). After 
five months in the hospital, Saybie went home in May 2019 weighing 
5 pounds. 


Small-for-Date Infants: Infants that have birth weights that are 
below expectation based on their gestational age are referred to as 
small-for-date. 
These infants may be full term or preterm, but still weigh less than 
90 % of all babies of the same gestational age. This is a very serious 
situation for newborns as their growth was adversely affected. 
Regev et al. (2003) found that small-for- date infants died at rates 
more than four times higher than other infants. Remember that 
many causes of low birth weight and preterm births are preventable 
with proper prenatal care. 

Postpartum Maternal Concerns 

After pregnancy many women experience emotional changes. The 
“baby blues” are often mentioned as a common occurrence in new 
mothers. The baby blues are feelings of sadness that occur 3 to 
5 days after having a baby, and typically disappear usually within 
10 days of the birth. New mothers may have trouble sleeping, be 


moody, and feel let-down from the birthing experience. However, 
postpartum depression is not the same as the baby blues. According 
to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-5th 
edition (DSM-5), (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), 
peripartum onset of depression, also known as postpartum 
depression, is a type of depression that occurs during pregnancy or 
in the 4 weeks following pregnancy. Approximately 1 out of 8 women 
experience postpartum depression and symptoms can include 
feelings of sadness, sleeplessness, and difficulty bonding with the 
newborn. 

Changing hormone levels are thought to be a factor in the 
occurrence of peripartum depression, however, risk factors include 
having depression previously, a family history of depression, being 
younger than 20, experiencing stress, and substance use. 
Peripartum-onset mood disorders, both depression, and mania can 
present with or without psychotic features. Hallucinations and 
delusions are associated with postpartum psychotic episodes and 
have included command hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions 
that the infant is possessed. Psychotic features occur in 
approximately 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000 deliveries, and the risk is higher 
for women with prior postpartum mood episodes (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013). 

Postpartum anxiety is also a concern for many new mothers. 
According to Bregel (2017), because oxytocin, a bonding hormone, 
rises during pregnancy, brain areas related to empathy and anxiety 
are heightened. Consequently, the new mother is “hard-wired” to 
respond to and fend for her baby, which can lead to toxic levels 
of stress and anxiety. These can manifest as heightened alertness, 
intrusive and horrifying thoughts of something terrible happening 
to the infant, and physiological arousal. Just as for peripartum 
depression and postpartum psychosis, a new mother experiencing 
postpartum anxiety should seek assistance from a health care 
provider. 


References 

Albert, E. (2013). Many more women delay childbirth into 40s due 
to career constraints. Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Retrieved from 
http://www.jsonline.com/news/health/many-more-women-
delay-childbirth-into-40s-due-to-career-constraints- 
b9971144z1-220272671.html 

American Pregnancy Association. (2015). Epidural anesthesia. 
Retrieved from http://americanpregnancy.org/labor-and- birth/
epidural/ 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5). 
Washington, DC: Author. 

American Society of Reproductive Medicine. (2015). State infertility 
insurance laws. Retrieved from 
http://www.reproductivefacts.org/insurance.aspx 

Berger, K. S. (2005). The developing person through the life span 
(6th ed.). New York: Worth. Berk, L. (2004). Development through 
the life span (3rd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Betts, J. G., DeSaix, P., Johnson, E., Johnson, J. E., Korol, O., Kruse, D. 
H., Poe, B., Wise, J. A., & Young, K. A. (2019). 
Anatomy and physiology (OpenStax). Houston, TX: Rice 
University. 

Bortolus, R., Parazzini, F., Chatenoud, L., Benzi, G., Bianchi, M. M., & 
Marini, A. (1999). The epidemiology of multiple births. 
Human Reproduction Update, 5, 179-187. 

Bray, I., Gunnell, D., & Smith, G. D. (2006). Advanced paternal age: 
How old is too old? Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 
60(10), 851-853. Doi: 10.1136/jech.2005.045179 

Brazelton, T. B., & Nugent, J. K. (1995). Neonatal behavioral 
assessment scale. London: Mac Keith Press. 

Bregel, S. (2017). The lonely terror of postpartum anxiety. Retrieved 
from https://www.thecut.com/2017/08/the-lonely-terror-of- 
postpartum-anxiety.html 


Carrell, D. T., Wilcox, A. L., Lowry, L., Peterson, C. M., Jones, K. P., 
& Erikson, L. (2003). Elevated sperm chromosome aneuploidy and 
apoptosis in patients with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss. 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 101(6), 1229-1235. 

Carroll, J. L. (2007). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (2nd ed.). 
Belmont, CA: Thomson. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2005). Surgeon’s 
general’s advisory on alcohol use during pregnancy. Retrieved 
from https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/fasd/documents/
surgeongenbookmark.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Pelvic 
inflammatory disease. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/std/
pid/stdfact-pid-detailed.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015a). Birthweight 
and gestation. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/birthweight.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015b) Genetic 
counseling. Retrieved from: 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/genetics/
genetic_counseling.html 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015c). Preterm birth. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/
pretermbirth.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015d). Smoking, 
pregnancy, and babies. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/diseases/
pregnancy.html 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016a). Fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorders. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/
ncbddd/fasd 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016b). HIV/AIDS 
prevention. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/basics/
prevention.html 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016c). HIV 


transmission. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/basics/
transmission.html 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016d). STDs during 
pregnancy. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/std/pregnancy/
stdfact-pregnancy.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019). Pregnancy-
related deaths. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/
maternal-deaths/ 

Chiu, A. (2019, May 30). ‘She’s a miracle’: Born weighing about as 
much as ‘a large apple,’ Saybie is the world’s smallest surviving 
baby. The Washington Post. Retrieved from 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2019/05/30/world- 
smallest-surviving-baby-saybie-
miracle/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.7c8d0bb6acf7 

Conners, N.A., Bradley, R.H., Whiteside-Mansell, L., Liu, J.Y., Roberts, 
T.J., Burgdorf, K., & Herrell, J.M. (2003). Children of mothers with 
serious substance abuse problems: An accumulation of risks. The 
American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 29 (4), 743–758. 

Cordier, S. (2008). Evidence for a role of paternal exposure in 
developmental toxicity. Basic and Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, 102, 176-181. 

Eisenberg, A., Murkoff, H. E., & Hathaway, S. E. (1996). What to 
expect when you’re expecting. New York: Workman Publishing. 

Figdor, E., & Kaeser, L. (1998). Concerns mount over punitive 
approaches to substance abuse among pregnant women. The 
Guttmacher report on public policy, 1(5), 3–5. 

Fraga, M. F., Ballestar, E., Paz, M. F., Ropero, S., Setien, F., Ballestar, 
M. L., … Esteller, M. (2005). Epigenetic differences arise during 
the lifetime of monozygotic twins. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science (USA), 102, 10604-10609. DOI:10.1073/
pnas.0500398102 

Gottlieb, G. (1998). Normally occurring environmental and 
behavioral influences on gene activity: From central dogma to 
probabilistic epigenesis. Psychological Review, 105, 792-802. 

Gottlieb, G. (2000). Environmental and behavioral influences on 


gene activity. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 
93-97. 

Gottlieb, G. (2002). Individual development and evolution: The 
genesis of novel behavior. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Gould, J. L., & Keeton, W. T. (1997). Biological science (6th ed.). New 
York: Norton. 
Gregory, E. (2007). Ready: Why women are embracing the new 
later motherhood. Philadelphia, PA: Basic Books. 

Grossman, D., & Slutsky, D. (2017). The effect of an increase in lead 
in the water system on fertility and birth outcomes: The case 
of Flint, Michigan. Economics Faculty Working Papers Series. 
Retrieved from http://www2.ku.edu/~kuwpaper/2017Papers/
201703.pdf 

Hall, D. (2004). Meiotic drive and sex chromosome cycling. 
Evolution, 58(5), 925-931. 

Health Resources and Services Administration. (2015). HIV screening 
for pregnant women. Retrieved from 
http://www.hrsa.gov/quality/toolbox/measures/
hivpregnantwomen/index.html 

Jos, P. H., Marshall, M. F., & Perlmutter, M. (1995). The Charleston 
policy on cocaine use during pregnancy: A cautionary tale. 
The Journal of Law, Medicine, and Ethics, 23(2), 120-128. 

Leve, L. D., Neiderhiser, J. M., Scarmella, L. V., & Reiss, D. (2010). 
The early growth and development study: Using the prospective 
adoption design to examine genotype-interplay. Behavior 
Genetics, 40, 306-314. DOI: 10.1007/s10519- 010- 9353-1 

MacDorman, M., Menacker, F., & Declercq, E. (2010). Trends and 
characteristics of home and other out of hospital births in the 
United States, 1990-2006 (United States, Center for Disease 
Control). Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/
nvsr58;nvsr58_11.PDF 

Maier, S.E., & West, J.R. (2001). Drinking patterns and alcohol-related 
birth defects. Alcohol Research & Health, 25(3), 168- 174. 

March of Dimes. (2009). Rh disease. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/complications/rh-disease.aspx 


March of Dimes. (2012a). Rubella and your baby. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/baby/rubella-and-your- 
baby.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2012b). Stress and pregnancy. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy/stress-and- 
pregnancy.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2012c). Teenage pregnancy. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/materials/teenage-
pregnancy.pdf 

March of Dimes. (2012d). Toxoplasmosis. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/complications/
toxoplasmosis.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2013). Sexually transmitted diseases. Retrieved 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/complications/sexually- 
transmitted-diseases.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2014). Pesticides and pregnancy. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy/pesticides-and-
pregnancy.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2015a). Depression during pregnancy. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/complications/depression-
during-pregnancy.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2015b). Gestational diabetes. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/complications/gestational- 
diabetes.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2015c). High blood pressure during pregnancy. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/complications/high-blood-
pressure-during-pregnancy.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2015d). Neonatal abstinence syndrome. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/complications/neonatal-
abstinence-syndrome-(nas).aspx 

March of Dimes. (2016a). Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders. Retrieved 
from 


http://www.marchofdimes.org/complications/fetal-alcohol-
spectrum-disorders.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2016b). Identifying the causes of birth defects. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/research/identifying-the-
causes-of-birth-defects.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2016c). Marijuana and pregnancy. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy/marijuana.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2016d). Pregnancy after age 35. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy-after-age-35.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2016e). Prescription medicine during pregnancy. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy/prescription-
medicine-during-pregnancy.aspx 

March of Dimes. (2016f). Weight gain during pregnancy. Retrieved 
from http://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy/weight- gain-
during-pregnancy.aspx 

Martin, J. A., Hamilton, B. E., Osterman, M., Curtin, S. C., & Mathews, 
T. J. (2015). Births: Final data for 2013. National Vital Statistics 
Reports, 64(1), 1-65. 

Mayo Clinic. (2014). Labor and delivery, postpartum care. Retrieved 
from http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/labor- and-
delivery/ in-depth/inducing-labor/art-20047557 

Mayo Clinic. (2015). Male infertility. Retrieved from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/male- 
infertility/basics/definition/con-20033113 

Mayo Clinic. (2016). Episiotomy: When it’s needed, when it’s not. 
Retrieved from http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy- lifestyle/
labor-and-delivery/in-depth/episiotomy/art-20047282 

Morgan, M.A., Goldenberg, R.L., & Schulkin, J. (2008) Obstetrician-
gynecologists’ practices regarding preterm birth at the limit of 
viability. The Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine, 21, 
115-121. 

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. (2013). 
Preeclampsia. Retrieved from 


https://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/topics/preeclampsia/
conditioninfo/Pages/risk.aspx 

National Institute of Health (2015). An overview of the human 
genome project. Retrieved from 
http://www.genome.gov/12011238 

National Institute of Health. (2019). Klinefelter syndrome. Retireived 
from https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/klinefelter- 
syndrome#statistics 

National Public Radio. (Producer). (2015, November 18). In 
Tennessee, giving birth to a drug-dependent baby can be a crime 
[Audio podcast]. Retrieved from http://www.npr.org/templates/
transcript.php?storyld=455924258 

Nippoldt, T.B. (2015). How does paternal age affect a baby’s health? 
Mayo Clinic. Retrieved from http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-
lifestyle/getting-pregnant/expert-answers/paternal-age/faq- 
20057873 

Pettersson, E., Larsson, H., D’Onofrio, B., Almqvist, C., & 
Lichtenstein, P. (2019). Association of fetal growth with general 
and specific mental health conditions. JAMA Psychiatry, 76(5), 
536-543. Doi:10.1001jamapsychiatry.2018.4342 

Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., Knopik, V. S., & Niederhiser, J. M. (2013). 
Behavioral genetics (6th edition). NY: Worth Publishers. Poduri, A., 
& Volpe, J. (2018). Volpe’s neurology of the newborn (6th edition). 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier. 
Regev, R.H., Lusky, T. Dolfin, I. Litmanovitz, S. Arnon, B. & 
Reichman. (2003). Excess mortality and morbidity among small- 
for-gestational-age premature infants: A population based study. 
Journal of Pediatrics, 143, 186-191. 

Rehan, V. K., Sakurai, J. S., & Torday, J. S. (2011). Thirdhand smoke: A 
new dimension to the effects of cigarette smoke in the developing 
lung. American Journal of Physiology: Lung Cellular and Molecular 
Physiology, 301(1), L1-8. 

Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (1997). Fetal 
awareness: Review of research and recommendations. 
Retrieved from https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-


research-services/guidelines/fetal-awareness—review-of- 
research-and-recommendations-for-practice/ 

Someji, S., & Beltrán-Sánchez, H. (2019). Association of maternal 
cigarette smoking and smoking cessation with preterm birth. 
JAMA Network Open, 2(4), e192514. doi:10.1001/
jamanetworkopen.2019.2514 

Stiles, J. & Jernigan, T. L. (2010). The basics of brain development. 
Neuropsychology Review, 20(4), 327-348. doi: 10.1007/
s11065-010-9148-4 

Streissguth, A.P., Barr, H.M., Kogan, J. & Bookstein, F. L. (1996). 
Understanding the occurrence of secondary disabilities in clients 
with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) and Fetal Alcohol Effects (FAE). 
Final Report to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC), August. Seattle: University of Washington, Fetal Alcohol & 
Drug Unit, Tech. Rep. No. 96-06. 

Sun, F., Sebastiani, P., Schupf, N., Bae, H., Andersen, S. L., McIntosh, 
A., Abel, H., Elo, I., & Perls, T. (2015). Extended maternal age at 
birth of last child and women’s longevity in the Long Life Family 
Study. Menopause: The Journal of the North American Menopause 
Society, 22(1), 26-31. 

Tong, V. T., Dietz, P.M., Morrow, B., D’Angelo, D.V., Farr, S.L., Rockhill, 
K.M., & England, L.J. (2013). Trends in smoking before, during, 
and after pregnancy — Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring 
System, United States, 40 Sites, 2000–2010. Surveillance 
Summaries, 62(SS06), 1-19. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6206a1.htm 

United States National Library of Medicine. (2014). In vitro 
fertilization. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/007279.htm 

United States National Library of Medicine. (2015a). Fetal 
development. Retrieved from 
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/
002398.htm 

United States National Library of Medicine. (2015b). Neonatal 


respiratory distress syndrome. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001563.htm 

World Health Organization. (2010, September 15). Maternal deaths 
worldwide drop by a third, WHO. Retrieved from 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/ 2010/
maternal_mortality_20100915/en/index.html 

Youngentob, S. L., Molina, J. C., Spear, N. E., & Youngentob, L. M. 
(2007). The effect of gestational ethanol exposure on voluntary 
ethanol intake in early postnatal and adult rats. Behavioral 
Neuroscience, 121(6), 1306-1315. doi.org/10.1037/
0735-7044.121.6.1306 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 2 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


PART 
VI 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
INFANCY & 
TODDLERHOOD 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore and connect Psychosocial, Cognitive, 
and Psychosexual Development 
Explore and connect another Theory, Approach, 
or Perspective to work in critical thinking skills for 
client assessments 
Explore important aspects of a person’s 
experience and ability to justify why they are 
important 



Vignette 

baby in incubator NICU
Photo by Sharon McCutcheon on 
Unsplash 

Misty arrived at 28 weeks’ 
gestation, right at 7 months into 
the pregnancy. She spent several 
weeks in the neonatal unit but 
showed positive growth in 
development during this time. 
Her mother, Pam, was able to 
spend time with Misty daily but 
was not allowed to hold or touch 
her very often in the beginning 
due to needs for respiratory support. Pam held her as often as she 
could to provide comfort, cherishing the increased time each day 
brought but also worried about how the limited physical contact 
would affect their bond. The hospital has reported Pam will be able to 
take Misty home in a few days and she is meeting with the Social 
Worker to plan for discharge. The Social Worker has provided support 
for the family with connection to resources for developmental 
supports and plans for a home visit to follow up in a few weeks. 

The Social Worker arrives for the follow up appointment and Pam 
reports taking care of Misty is “so much harder than I ever thought. 
She didn’t seem to cry this much when we were at the hospital and 
she won’t stay asleep longer than an hour at a time, it’s just so much 
and I don’t know how to help her or make her feel better”. Pam reports 
she has taken Misty to the doctor two times due to her concerns and 
was told they were not able to find any physical issues with Misty. 
Pam reported “I just feel so helpless, the doctors weren’t any help, 
they just told me I needed to give it some more time and she would 
eventually settle but I’m just not sure, it doesn’t seem to be settling, it 
seems like it’s just getting worse”. Pam also reports “I’ve been reading a 
lot of stuff online too about premature babies and attachment and it’s 
really scaring me because there are so many stories about how some 
babies really struggle with development and then all the stuff about 


poor attachment and all the stuff that happens if a baby doesn’t have a 
good attachment, it’s just all so scary…”. The Social Worker takes notes 
on areas of concern Pam reports with Misty and then explored use of 
the resources Pam had been given at discharge. Pam looks down and 
reports “No, I haven’t called any of them. It’s just been so crazy and 
hard with Misty that I haven’t even thought about them”. The Social 
Worker reflects how hard it must be trying to manage a new baby and 
battle so many concerns related to the baby’s health and well-being. 
The Social Worker discusses working to set a schedule and increasing 
some of the structure for their day to see if this may help provide 
some supports for both Pam and Misty. Pam reports being open to 
“anything that will help” and schedules to meet with the Social Worker 
the following week. 

Pam shares “nothing has changed” when the Social Worker arrives 
for their next meeting. The Social Worker allows Pam to share 
continued struggles with trying to comfort Misty and continued 
feelings of failure when “nothing works”. She states, “I just don’t 
understand. Is it me? Is something wrong with her? I just don’t 
understand and don’t know what to do. I tried all the stuff we talked 
about for a couple of days, but it didn’t seem to work so I stopped”. 
The Social Worker acknowledges how hard change can be and then 
explores options to make a referral for assessments in areas of 
Occupational and Mental Health supports, discussing while the 
pediatrician reports nothing is physically wrong with Misty, there 
may be some sensory issues presenting that would need a specific 
assessment by an Occupational Therapist. The Social Worker also 
discussed how Misty’s premature arrival can be felt as a trauma by 
both Misty and Pam and benefits of exploring this with a Mental 
Health provider for supports. Pam states “I’m willing to try anything 
at this point. Send me to as many places you think would help”. 


The Social Worker arrives for a follow up visit approximately 6 
weeks after referrals were made. Pam arrives at the door smiling. 
The Social Worker recognizes this and comments on the difference 
from their last visit. Pam states “It’s still been rough but better. We 
have started Occupational Therapy for some sensory issues that were 


found when we went for our assessment. We’ve also started seeing 
a therapist that focuses on work with parents and infants and it’s 
been life changing for me to have a better understanding of how our 
experiences have impacted us both, as well as learning some coping 
skills for when I’m feeling overwhelmed. We’ve also been doing some 
attachment work and I’m starting to feel more connected to Misty and 
can tell she’s feeling it too. We have a long way to go but I don’t feel so 
hopeless anymore, I know we’ll get there”. 


Critical Thinking: 

1. What stage of Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive 
Development is the client currently in? Are they 
meeting expectations of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any delays in this stage? 
Examples? 
2. What stage of Erikson’s Theory of Psychosocial 
Development are they currently in? Are they 
meeting the goals of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any struggles with their goals 
in this stage? Examples? 
3. What theory, approach, or perspective from 
previous Dimensions (PIE, Biopsychosocial, 
Sociocultural, or Social Change) would you use to 
assess this client? Why? 
4. What do you feel are the most important 
aspects (physical development, attachment, sexual 
development, etc) to consider for this client? 
Why? 



References 

Hutchinson, E. D. (2019). Dimensions of human behavior (Sixth 
edition). Sage Publications, Inc. 


Chapter 10: Physical 
Development in Infancy & 
Toddlerhood 

Chapter 10 Learning Objectives 

Summarize overall physical growth during infancy. 
Describe the growth in the brain during infancy. 
Explain infant sleep. 
Identify newborn reflexes. 
Compare gross and fine motor skills. 
Contrast the development of the senses in 
newborns. 
Describe the habituation procedure. 
Explain the merits of breastfeeding and when to 
introduce more solid foods. 
Discuss the nutritional concerns of marasmus and 
kwashiorkor. 


Overall Physical Growth 

The average newborn in the United States weighs about 7.5 pounds 


(between 5 and 10 pounds) and is about 20 inches in length. For the 
first few days of life, infants typically lose about 5 percent of their 
body weight as they eliminate waste and get used to feeding. This 
often goes unnoticed by most parents but can be cause for concern 
for those who have a smaller infant. This weight loss is temporary, 
however, and is followed by a rapid period of growth. By the time an 
infant is 4 months old, it usually doubles in weight and by one year 
has tripled the birth weight. By age 2, the weight has quadrupled, so 
we can expect that a 2-year-old should weigh between 20 and 40 
pounds. The average length at one year is about 29.5 inches and at 
two years it is around 34.4 inches (Bloem, 2007). 

Body Proportions 

Another dramatic physical change that takes place in the first 
several years of life is the change in body proportions. The head 
initially makes up about 50 percent of our entire length when we 
are developing in the womb. At birth, the head makes up about 25 
percent of our length, and by age 25 it comprises about 20 percent 
our length. 


The Brain in the First Two Years 

Some of the most dramatic physical change that occurs during this 
period is in the brain. We are born with most of the brain cells that 
we will ever have; that is, about 85 billion neurons whose function is 
to store and transmit information (Huttenlocher&Dabholkar, 1997). 
While most of the brain’s neurons are present at birth, they are not 
fully mature. During the next several years dendrites, or branching 
extensions that collect information from other neurons, will undergo 
a period of exuberance. Because of this proliferation of dendrites, 
by age two a single neuron might have thousands of dendrites. 
Synaptogenesis, or the formation of connections between neurons, 
continues from the prenatal period forming thousands of new 
connections during infancy and toddlerhood. This period of rapid 
neural growth is referred to as synaptic blooming. 

The blooming period of neural growth is then followed by a period 
of synaptic pruning, where neural connections are reduced thereby 
making those that are used much stronger. It is thought that pruning 


causes the brain to function more efficiently, allowing for mastery 
of more complex skills (Kolb & Whishaw, 2011). The experience will 
shape which of these connections are maintained and which of 
these are lost. Ultimately, about 40 percent of these connections 
will be lost (Webb, Monk, and Nelson, 2001). Blooming occurs during 
the first few years of life, and pruning continues through childhood 
and into adolescence in various areas of the brain. 

Another major change occurring in the central nervous system is 
the development of myelin, a coating of fatty tissues around the axon 
of the neuron (Carlson, 2014). Myelin helps insulate the nerve cell and 
speed the rate of transmission of impulses from one cell to another. 
This enhances the building of neural pathways and improves 
coordination and control of movement and thought processes. The 
development of myelin continues into adolescence but is most 
dramatic during the first several years of life. 

The infant’s brain grows very fast. At birth, the brain is about 250 
grams (half a pound) and by one year it is already 750 grams (Eliot, 
1999). Comparing to adult size, the newborn brain is approximately 
33% of adult size at birth, and in just 90 days, it is already at 
55% of adult size (Holland et al., 2014). Most of the neural activity 
is occurring in the cortex or the thin outer covering of the brain 
involved in voluntary activity and thinking. The cortex is divided 
into two hemispheres, and each hemisphere is divided into four 
lobes, each separated by folds known as fissures. If we look at the 
cortex starting at the front of the brain and moving over the top 
(see Figure 3.3), we see first the frontal lobe (behind the forehead), 
which is responsible primarily for thinking, planning, memory, and 
judgment. Following the frontal lobe is the parietal lobe, which 
extends from the middle to the back of the skull and which is 
responsible primarily for processing information about touch. Next 
is the occipital lobe, at the very back of the skull, which processes 
visual information. Finally, in front of the occipital lobe, between 
the ears, is the temporal lobe, which is responsible for hearing and 
language (Jarrett, 2015). 


Although the brain grows rapidly during infancy, specific brain 
regions do not mature at the same rate. Primary motor areas 
develop earlier than primary sensory areas, and the prefrontal 
cortex, that is located behind the forehead, is the least developed 
(Giedd, 2015). As the prefrontal cortex matures, the child is 
increasingly able to regulate or control emotions, to plan activities, 
strategize, and have better judgment. This is not fully accomplished 
in infancy and toddlerhood but continues throughout childhood, 
adolescence, and adulthood. 

Lateralization is the process in which different functions become 
localized primarily on one side of the brain. For example, in most 
adults the left hemisphere is more active than the right during 
language production, while the reverse pattern is observed during 
tasks involving visuospatial abilities (Springer & Deutsch, 1993). This 
process develops over time, however, structural asymmetries 
between the hemispheres have been reported even in fetuses (Chi, 
Dooling, & Gilles, 1997; Kasprian et al., 2011) and infants (Dubois et 
al., 2009). 

Lastly, neuroplasticity refers to the brain’s ability to change, both 
physically and chemically, to enhance its adaptability to 


environmental change and compensate for an injury. The control 
of some specific bodily functions, such as movement, vision, and 
hearing, is performed in specified areas of the cortex, and if these 
areas are damaged, the individual will likely lose the ability to 
perform the corresponding function. The brain’s neurons have a 
remarkable capacity to reorganize and extend themselves to carry 
out these particular functions in response to the needs of the 
organism, and to repair any damage. As a result, the brain constantly 
creates new neural communication routes and rewires existing 
ones. Both environmental experiences, such as stimulation and 
events within a person’s body, such as hormones and genes, affect 
the brain’s plasticity. So too does age. Adult brains demonstrate 
neuroplasticity, but they are influenced less extensively than those 
of infants (Kolb & Fantie, 1989; Kolb & Whishaw, 2011). 

Infant Sleep 

A newborn typically sleeps approximately 16.5 hours per 24-hour 
period. This is usually polyphasic sleep in that the infant is 
accumulating the 16.5 hours over several sleep periods throughout 
the day (Salkind, 2005). The infant is averaging 15 hours per 24-hour 
period by one month, and 14 hours by 6 months. By the time 
children turn two, they are averaging closer to 10 hours per 24 
hours. Additionally, the average newborn will spend close to 50% 
of the sleep time in the Rapid Eye Movement (REM) phase, which 
decreases to 25% to 30% in childhood. 


Sudden Unexpected Infant Deaths (SUID): Each year in the United 
States, there are about 3,500 Sudden Unexpected Infant Deaths 
(SUID). These deaths occur among infants less than one-year-old 
and have no immediately obvious cause (CDC, 2019). The three 
commonly reported types of SUID are: 

Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS): SIDS is identified when 
the death of a healthy infant occurs suddenly and unexpectedly, 
and medical and forensic investigation findings (including an 
autopsy) are inconclusive. SIDS is the leading cause of death in 
Figure 3.4 75 infants 1 to 12 months old, and approximately 
1,400 infants died of SIDS in 2017 (CDC, 2019). Because SIDS is 
diagnosed when no other cause of death can be determined, 
possible causes of SIDS are regularly researched. One leading 
hypothesis suggests that infants who die from SIDS have 
abnormalities in the area of the brainstem responsible for 
regulating breathing (Weekes-Shackelford & Shackelford, 
2005). 
Unknown Cause: The sudden death of an infant less than one 
year of age that cannot be explained because a thorough 
investigation was not conducted, and the cause of death could 



not be determined. In 2017, 1300 infants died from unknown 
causes (CDC, 2019). 
Accidental Suffocation and Strangulation in Bed: Reasons for 
accidental suffocation include: Suffocation by soft bedding, 
another person rolling on top of or against the infant while 
sleeping, an infant being wedged between two objects such as 
a mattress and wall, and strangulation such as when an infant’s 
head and neck become caught between crib railings. In 2017, 
900 infants died from accidental suffocation and strangulation. 


The combined SUID death rate declined considerably following the 
release of the American Academy of Pediatrics safe sleep 
recommendations in 1992, which advocated that infants be placed 
for sleep on their backs (nonprone position). These 
recommendations were followed by a major Back to Sleep Campaign 
in 1994. However, accidental suffocation and strangulation in bed 
mortality rates remained unchanged until the late 1990s. In 1998 
death rates from accidental suffocation and strangulation in bed 


actually started to increase, and they reached the highest rate at 
24.6 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2017 (CDC, 2019). 

Should infants be sharing the bed with parents? 


Colvin, Collie-Akers, Schunn, and Moon (2014) analyzed a total of 
8207 deaths from 24 states during 2004–2012 that were contained in 
the National Center for the Review and Prevention of Child Deaths 
Case Reporting System, a database of death reports from state child 
death review teams. The results indicated that younger victims (0-3 
months) were more likely to die by bed-sharing and sleeping in 
an adult bed/on a person. A higher percentage of older victims (4 
months to 364 days) rolled into objects in the sleep environment 
and changed position from side/back to prone. Carpenter et al. 
(2013) compared infants who died of SIDS with a matched control 
and found that infants younger than three months old who slept 
in bed with a parent were five times more likely to die of SIDS 
compared to babies who slept separately from the parents but were 
still in the same room. They concluded that bed-sharing, even when 
the parents do not smoke or take alcohol or drugs, increases the 
risk of SIDS. However, when combined with parental smoking and 
maternal alcohol consumption and/or drug use, risks associated 
with bed-sharing greatly increased. 

The two studies discussed above were based on American 
statistics. What about the rest of the world? Co-sleeping occurs in 
many cultures, primarily because of a more collectivist perspective 
that encourages a close parent-child bond and interdependent 
relationship (Morelli, Rogoff, Oppenheim, & Goldsmith, 1992). In 
countries where co-sleeping is common, however, Figure 3.7 Source 
77 parents and infants typically sleep on floor mats and other hard 
surfaces which minimize the suffocation that can occur with 
bedding (Nelson, Schiefenhoevel, & Haimerl, 2000). 

From Reflexes to Voluntary Movements 

Table 3.1 Some Common Infant Reflexes 


Newborns are equipped with a number of reflexes (see Table 3.1) 
which are involuntary movements in response to stimulation. Some 
of the more common reflexes, such as the sucking reflex and 
rooting reflex, are important to feeding. The grasping and stepping 
reflexes are eventually replaced by more voluntary behaviors. 
Within the first few months of life these reflexes disappear, while 
other reflexes, such as the eye-blink, swallowing, sneezing, gagging, 
and withdrawal reflex stay with us as they continue to serve 
important functions. Reflexes offer pediatricians insight into the 
maturation and health of the nervous system. Reflexes that persist 
longer than they should and can impede normal development 
(Berne, 2006). In preterm infants and those with neurological 
impairments, some of these reflexes may be absent at birth. Once 
present, they may persist longer than in a neurologically healthy 
infant (El-Dib, Massaro, Glass & Aly, 2012). 

Motor Development 

Motor development occurs in an orderly sequence as infants move 
from reflexive reactions (e.g., sucking and rooting) to more 
advanced motor functioning. As mentioned during the prenatal 
section, development occurs according to the Cephalocaudal (from 
head to tail) and Proximodistal (from the midline outward) 
principles. For instance, babies first learn to hold their heads up, 
then to sit with assistance, then to sit unassisted, followed later 
by crawling, pulling up, cruising or walking while holding on to 
something, and then unassisted walking (Eisenberg, Murkoff, & 
Hathaway, 1989). As motor skills develop, there are certain 
developmental milestones that young children should achieve. For 
each milestone, there is an average age, as well as a range of ages 
in which the milestone should be reached. An example of a 
developmental milestone is a baby holding up its head. Babies on 
average are able to hold up their head at 6 weeks old, and 90% of 
babies achieve this between 3 weeks and 4 months old. On average, 
most babies sit alone at 7 months old. Sitting involves both 
coordination and muscle strength, and 90% of babies achieve this 
milestone between 5 and 9 months old. If the child is displaying 
delays on several milestones, that is reason for concern, and the 
parent or caregiver should discuss this with the child’s pediatrician. 
Developmental delays can be identified and addressed through 
early intervention. 


Motor Skills refer to our ability to move our bodies and manipulate 
objects. Fine motor skills focus on the muscles in our fingers, toes, 
and eyes, and enable coordination of small actions (e.g., grasping 
a toy, writing with a pencil, and using a spoon). Newborns cannot 
grasp objects voluntarily but do wave their arms toward objects of 
interest. At about 4 months of age, the infant is able to reach for an 
object, first with both arms and within a few weeks, with only one 
arm. At this age grasping an object involves the use of the fingers 
and palm, but no thumbs. 
This is known as the Palmer Grasp. 
The 
use of the thumb comes at about 9 months of age when the infant 
is able to grasp an object using the forefinger and thumb. Now the 
infant uses a Pincer Grasp, and this ability greatly enhances the 
ability to control and manipulate an object and infants take great 
delight in this newfound ability. They may spend hours picking up 
small objects from the floor and placing them in containers. By 9 


months, an infant can also watch a moving object, reach for it as it 
approaches, and grab it. 


Gross motor skills focus on large muscle groups that control our 
head, torso, arms and legs and involve larger movements (e.g., 
balancing, running, and jumping). These skills begin to develop first. 
Examples include moving to bring the chin up when lying on the 
stomach, moving the chest up, and rocking back and forth on hands 
and knees. But it also includes exploring an object with one’s feet as 
many babies do as early as 8 weeks of age if seated in a carrier or 
other device that frees the hips. This may be easier than reaching for 
an object with the hands, which requires much more practice (Berk, 
2007). Sometimes an infant will try to move toward an object while 
crawling and surprisingly move backward because of the greater 
amount of strength in the arms than in the legs. 

Sensory Capacities 

Throughout much of history, the newborn was considered a passive, 
disorganized being who possessed minimal abilities. William James, 
an early psychologist, had described the newborn’s world as “a 
blooming, buzzing confusion,” (Shaffer, 1985). However, current 
research techniques have demonstrated just how developed the 
newborn is with especially organized sensory and perceptual 
abilities. 

Vision: The womb is a dark environment void of visual stimulation. 
Consequently, vision is one of the most poorly developed senses at 
birth, and time is needed to build those neural pathways between 
the eyes and the brain (American Optometric Association [AOA], 
2019). Newborns typically cannot see further than 8 to 10 inches 
away from their faces (AOA, 2019). An 8-week old’s vision is 20/
300. This means an object 20 feet away from an infant has the same 
clarity as an object 300 feet away from an adult with normal vision. 


By 3-months visual acuity has sharpened to 20/200, which would 
allow them the see the letter E at the top of a standard eye chart 
(Hamer, 2016). As a result, the world looks blurry to young infants 
(Johnson & deHaan, 2015). 

Why is visual acuity so poor in the infant? The 
fovea, 
which is the 
central field of vision in the retina and allows us to see sharp 
detail, 
is not fully developed at birth, and does not start to reach 
adult levels of development until 15 months (Li & Ding, 2017). Even 
by 45 months some of the sensory neurons (cones) of the fovea are 
still not fully grown. Can babies see color? 

Young infants can perceive color, but the colors need to be very 
pure forms of basic colors, such as vivid red or green rather than 
weaker pastel shades. Most studies report that babies can see the 
full spectrum of colors by five months of age (AOA, 2019). 

Newborn infants prefer and orient to face-like stimuli more than 
they do other patterned stimuli (Farroni 
et al., 2005). They also 
prefer images of faces that are upright and not scrambled (Chien, 
2011). Infants also quickly learn to distinguish the face of their 
mother from faces of other women (Bartrip, Morton, & De 
Schonen, 
2001). When viewing a person’s face, one-month 
olds 
fixate on the 
outer edges of the face rather than the eyes, nose, or mouth, and 
two-month 
olds 
gaze more at the inner features, especially the eyes 
(Hainline, 1978). 

Researchers have examined the development of attention and 
tracking in the visual system and have found the following for young 
infants: 

One-month-olds have difficulty disengaging their attention 
and can spend several 
minutes fixedly gazing at a stimulus 
(Johnson & 
deHaan, 
2015). 
Aslin (1981) found that when tracking an object visually, the eye 
movements of newborns and one-month 
olds 
are not smooth 



but 
saccadic, 
that is 
step-like jerky movements. Aslin also 
found their eye movements lag behind the object’s motion. 
This means young infants do not anticipate the trajectory of 
the object. By two months of 
age, their eye movements are 
becoming smoother, but they still lag behind the motion of the 
object and will not achieve this until about three to four 
months of age (Johnson & 
deHaan, 
2015). 
Newborns also orient more to the visual field toward the side 
of the head, than to the visual field on either side of the nose 
(Lewis, Maurer, & Milewski, 1979). By two 
to three months, 
stimuli in both fields are now equally attended to (Johnson 
& 
deHaan, 2015). 


Binocular vision, which requires input from both eyes, is evident 
around the third month and continues to develop during the first 
six months (Atkinson & Braddick, 2003). By six months infants can 
perceive depth perception in pictures as well (Sen, Yonas, & Knill, 
2001). Infants who have experience crawling and exploring will pay 
greater attention to visual cues of depth and modify their actions 
accordingly (Berk, 2007). 

Hearing: The infant’s sense of hearing is very keen at birth, and the 
ability to hear is evidenced as soon as the seventh month of prenatal 
development. Newborns prefer their mother’s voices over another 
female when speaking the same material (DeCasper 
& Fifer, 1980). 
Additionally, they will register in utero specific information heard 
from their mother’s 
voice. 


DeCasper and Spence (1986) tested 16 infants (average age of 55.8 
hours) whose mothers had previously read to them prenatally. The 
mothers read several passages to their fetuses, including the first 
28 paragraphs of the Cat in the Hat, beginning when they were 7 
months pregnant. The fetuses had been exposed to the stories an 
average of 67 times or 1.5 hours. When the experimental infants 
were tested, the target stories (previously heard) were more 
reinforcing than the novel story as measured by their rate of 
sucking. However, for control infants, the target stories were not 
more reinforcing than the novel story indicating that the 
experimental infants had heard them before. 


An infant can distinguish between very similar sounds as early as 
one month after birth and can distinguish between a familiar and 
non-familiar voice even earlier. Infants are especially sensitive to 
the frequencies of sounds in human speech and prefer the 
exaggeration of infant-directed speech, which will be discussed 
later. Additionally, infants are innately ready to respond to the 
sounds of any language, but between six and nine months they show 
a preference for listening to their native language (Jusczyk, Cutler, 


& Redanz, 1993). Their ability to distinguish the sounds that are not 
in the language around them diminishes rapidly (Cheour-Luhtanen, 
et al., 1995). 


Touch and Pain: Immediately after birth, a newborn is sensitive 
to touch and temperature, and is also highly sensitive to pain, 
responding with crying and cardiovascular responses (Balaban & 
Reisenauer, 2013). Newborns who are circumcised, which is the 
surgical removal of the foreskin of the penis, without anesthesia 
experience pain as demonstrated by increased blood pressure, 
increased heart rate, decreased oxygen in the blood, and a surge of 
stress hormones (United States National Library of Medicine, 2016). 
Research has demonstrated that infants who were circumcised 
without anesthesia experienced more pain and fear during routine 
childhood vaccines. Fortunately, today many local pain killers are 
currently used during circumcision. 

Taste and Smell: Studies of taste and smell demonstrate that babies 
respond with different facial expressions, suggesting that certain 
preferences are innate. Newborns can distinguish between sour, 
bitter, sweet, and salty flavors and show a preference for sweet 
flavors. Newborns also prefer the smell of their mothers. An infant 
only 6 days old is significantly more likely to turn toward its own 
mother’s breast pad than to the breast pad of another baby’s mother 
(Porter, Makin, Davis, & Christensen, 1992), and within hours of birth 
an infant also shows a preference for the face of its own mother 
(Bushnell, 2001; Bushnell, Sai, & Mullin, 1989). 


Intermodality: Infants seem to be born with the ability to perceive 
the world in an intermodal way; that is, through stimulation from 
more than one sensory modality. For example, infants who sucked 
on a pacifier with either a smooth or textured surface preferred 
to look at a corresponding (smooth or textured) visual model of 
the pacifier. By 4 months, infants can match lip movements with 
speech sounds and can match other audiovisual events. Sensory 
processes are certainly affected by the infant’s developing motor 
abilities (Hyvärinen, Walthes, Jacob, Nottingham Chapin, & 
Leonhardt, 2014). Reaching, crawling, and other actions allow the 
infant to see, touch, and organize his or her experiences in new 
ways. 

How are Infants Tested: 
Habituation procedures, 
that is measuring 
decreased responsiveness to a stimulus after repeated 
presentations, have increasingly been used to evaluate infants to 
study the development of perceptual and memory skills. Phelps 
(2005) describes a habituation procedure used when measuring the 
rate of the sucking reflex. 


Researchers first measure the initial baseline rate of sucking to 
a pacifier equipped with transducers that measure muscle 
contractions. Next, an auditory stimulus is presented, such as a 
human voice uttering a speech sound such as “da.” The rate of 
sucking will typically increase with the new sound, but then 
decrease to baseline levels as “da” is repeatedly presented, showing 
habituation. If the sound “ma” was then presented, the rate of 
sucking would again increase, demonstrating that the infant can 
discriminate between these two stimuli. 

Additionally, the speed or efficiency with which infants show 
habituation has been shown to predict outcomes in behaviors, such 
as language acquisition and verbal and nonverbal intelligence. 
Infants who show difficulty during habituation, or habituate at 
slower than normal rates, have been found to be at an increased risk 
for significant developmental delays. Infants with Down syndrome, 
teratogen-exposed infants, malnourished infants, and premature 
infants have all been studied. Researchers have found that at the 
age of 16 months, high-risk infants show rates of habituation 
comparable to newborn infants (Phelps, 2005). 

Nutrition 

Breast milk is considered the ideal diet for newborns. Colostrum, 
the first breast milk produced during pregnancy, and just after birth 
has been described as “liquid gold” (United States Department of 
Health and Human Services (USDHHS), 2011). It is very rich in 
nutrients and antibodies. Breast milk changes by the third to fifth 
day after birth, becoming much thinner, but containing just the 
right amount of fat, sugar, water, and proteins to support overall 
physical and neurological development. For most babies, breast milk 
is also easier to digest than formula. Formula-fed infants experience 
more diarrhea and upset stomachs. The absence of antibodies in 
formula often results in a higher rate of ear infections and 
respiratory infections. Children who are breastfed have lower rates 
of childhood leukemia, asthma, obesity, type 1 and 2 diabetes, and 
a lower risk of SIDS. The USDHHS recommends that mothers 
breastfeed their infants until at least 6 months of age and that breast 
milk be used in the diet throughout the first year or two. 


Several recent studies have reported that it is not just babies that 
benefit from breastfeeding. Breastfeeding stimulates contractions 
in the uterus to help it regain its normal size, and women who 
breastfeed are more likely to space their pregnancies further apart. 
Mothers who breastfeed are at lower risk of developing breast 
cancer (Islami et al., 2015), especially among higher-risk racial and 
ethnic groups (Islami et al., 2015; Redondo et al., 2012). Women who 
breastfeed have lower rates of ovarian cancer (Titus-Ernstoff, Rees, 
Terry, & Cramer, 2010), reduced risk for developing Type 2 diabetes 
(Schwarz et al., 2010; Gunderson, et al., 2015), and rheumatoid 
arthritis (Karlson, Mandl, Hankinson, & Grodstein, 2004). In most 
studies these benefits have been seen in women who breastfeed 
longer than 6 months. 


Current rates of breastfeeding indicate that 83.2% of mothers have 
breastfed their infants at some point (CDC, 2018). However, most 
mothers who breastfeed in the United States stop breastfeeding 
exclusively at about 6-8 weeks, often in order to return to work 
outside the home (USDHHS, 2011). Mothers can certainly continue 
to provide breast milk to their babies by expressing and freezing the 
milk to be bottle fed at a later time or by being available to their 
infants at feeding time. However, some mothers find that after the 
initial encouragement they receive in the hospital to breastfeed, the 
outside world is less supportive of such efforts. Some workplaces 
support breastfeeding mothers by providing flexible schedules and 
welcoming infants, but many do not. In addition, not all women may 
be able to breastfeed. Women with HIV are routinely discouraged 
from breastfeeding as the infection may pass to the infant. Similarly, 
women who are taking certain medications or undergoing radiation 
treatment may be told not to breastfeed (USDHHS, 2011). 


Besides the nutritional benefits of breastfeeding, breast milk is free. 
Anyone who has priced formula recently can appreciate this added 
incentive to 
breastfeeding. Prices for a year’s worth of formula and 
feeding supplies can cost between $1,500 and $3000 per year (Los 
Angles County Department of Public Health, 2019). In addition to 
the formula, costs include bottles, nipples, sterilizers, and other 
supplies. 



One early argument given to promote the practice of breastfeeding 
was that it promoted bonding and healthy emotional development 
for infants. However, this does not seem to be the case. Breastfed 
and bottle-fed infants adjust equally well emotionally (Ferguson & 
Woodward, 1999). This is good news for mothers who may be unable 
to breastfeed for a variety of reasons and for fathers who might feel 
left out. 

When to Introduce More Solid Foods: Solid foods should not be 
introduced until the infant is ready. According to The Clemson 
University Cooperative Extension (2014), some things to look for 
include that the infant: 

can sit up without needing 
support 
can hold its head up without 
wobbling 
shows interest in foods others are 
eating 



is still hungry after being breastfed or formula-fed 
is able to move foods from the front to the back of the 
mouth 
is able to turn away when they have had enough 


For many infants who are 4 to 6 months of age, breast milk or 
formula can be supplemented with more solid foods. The first semi-
solid foods that are introduced are iron-fortified infant cereals 
mixed with breast milk or formula. Typically rice, oatmeal, and 
barley cereals are offered as a number of infants are sensitive to 
more wheat-based cereals. Finger foods such as toast squares, 
cooked vegetable strips, or peeled soft fruit can be introduced by 
10-12 months. New foods should be introduced one at a time, and 
the new food should be fed for a few days in a row to allow the 
baby time to adjust to the new food. This also allows parents time 
to assess if the child has a food allergy. Foods that have multiple 
ingredients should be avoided until parents have assessed how the 
child responds to each ingredient separately. Foods that are sticky 
(such as peanut butter or taffy), cut into large chunks (such as 
cheese and harder meats), and firm and round (such as hard candies, 
grapes, or cherry tomatoes) should be avoided as they are a choking 
hazard. Honey and corn syrup should be avoided as these often 
contain botulism spores. In children under 12 months, this can lead 
to death (Clemson University Cooperative Extension, 2014). 


Figure 3.12 

Global Considerations and Malnutrition 

Children in developing countries and countries experiencing the 
harsh conditions of war are at risk for two major types of 
malnutrition, also referred to as wasting. Infantile 
marasmus 
refers 
to starvation due to a lack of calories and protein. Children who do 
not receive adequate nutrition lose fat and muscle until their bodies 


can no longer function. Babies who are breastfed are much less at 
risk of malnutrition than those who are bottle-fed. 

After weaning, children who have diets deficient in protein may 
experience kwashiorkor known as the “disease of the displaced 
child” often occurring after another child has been born and taken 
over breastfeeding. This results in a loss of appetite and swelling of 
the abdomen as the body begins to break down the vital organs as a 
source of protein. 

Around the world, the rates of wasting have been dropping. 
However, according to the World Health Organization and UNICEF, 
in 2014 there were 50 million children under the age of five that 
experienced these forms of wasting, and 16 million were severely 
wasted (UNICEF, 2015). This works out to 1 child in every 13 children 
in the world suffers from some form of wasting, and the majority 


of these children live in Asia (34.3 million) and Africa (13.9 million). 
Wasting can occur as a result of severe food shortages, regional 
diets that lack certain proteins and vitamins, or infectious diseases 
that inhibit appetite (Latham, 1997). 


The consequences of wasting depend on how late in the progression 
of the disease parents and guardians seek medical treatment for 
their children. Unfortunately, in some cultures families do not seek 
treatment early, and as a result by the time a child is hospitalized the 
child often dies within the first three days after admission (Latham, 
1997). Several studies have reported long- term cognitive effects 
of early malnutrition (Galler & Ramsey, 1989; Galler, Ramsey, Salt 
& Archer, 1987; Richardson, 1980), even when home environments 
were controlled (Galler, Ramsey, Morley, Archer & Salt, 1990). Lower 
IQ scores (Galler et al., 1987), poor attention (Galler & Ramsey, 1989), 
and behavioral issues in the classroom (Galler et al., 1990) have been 
reported in children with a history of serious malnutrition in the 
first few years of life. 

References 

Ainsworth, M. (1979). Infant-mother attachment. American 
Psychologist, 34(10), 932-937. 

Ainsworth, M., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of 
attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Akimoto, S. A., & Sanbinmatsu, D. M. (1999). Differences in self-
effacing behavior between European and Japanese Americans: 
Effect on competence evaluations. Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology, 30, 159-177. 

American Optometric Association. (2019). 
Infant vision: Birth to 24 
months of age. Retrieved from 
https://www.aoa.org/patients-
and-public/good-vision-throughout-life/childrens-vision/
infant-vision-birth-to-24- 
months-of-age 


American Psychiatric Association. (2013). 
Diagnostic 
and 
statistical 
manual of 
mental 
disorders, 5th 
edition (DSM-5). 

Washington, DC: Author. 

Anglin, J. M. (1993). Vocabulary development: A morphological 
analysis. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child 
Development, 58 10), v–165. 

Aslin, R. N. (1981). Development of smooth pursuit in human infants. 
In D. F. Fisher, R. A. Monty, & J. W. Senders (Eds.), Eye movements: 
Cognition and visual perception (pp. 31– 51). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 

Atkinson, J., & Braddick, O. (2003). Neurobiological models of normal 
and abnormal visual development. In M. de Haan & M. H. Johnson 
(Eds.), 
The cognitive neuroscience of development 
(pp. 43– 71). 
Hove: Psychology Press. 

Baillargeon, R. (1987. Object permanence in 3 ½ and 4 ½ year-old 
infants. Developmental Psychology, 22, 655-664. Baillargeon, R., 
Li, J., Gertner, Y, & Wu, D. (2011). How do infants reason about 
physical events? In U. Goswami (Ed.), The 
Wiley-Blackwell 
handbook of childhood cognitive development. MA: John Wiley. 


Balaban, M. T. & Reisenauer, C. D. (2013). Sensory development. 
In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), Encyclopedia of human development 
(pp. 
1144-1147). New, York: Sage Publications. 


Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Early referential understanding: Infants’ ability 
to recognize referential acts for what they are. Developmental 
Psychology, 29(5), 832–843. 


Bandura, A. (1977). 
Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 

Bartrip J, Morton J, & De Schonen S. (2001). Responses to mother’s 
face in 3-week to 5-month-old infants. British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology, 19, 219–232 

Berk, L. E. (2007). 
Development through the life span 
(4th ed.). 
Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Berne, S. A. (2006). The primitive reflexes: Considerations in the 
infant. Optometry & Vision Development, 37(3), 139-145. Bloem, 
M. (2007). The 2006 WHO child growth standards. BMJ 
: British 


Medical Journal, 334(7596), 705–706. 
http://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.39155.658843.BE 


Blossom, M., & Morgan, J. L. (2006). Does the face say what the 
mouth says? A study of infants’ sensitivity to visual prosody. In 
the 30th annual Boston University conference on language 
development, Somerville, MA. 


Bogartz, R. S., Shinskey, J. L., & Schilling, T. (2000). Object 
permanence in five-and-a-half month old infants. Infancy, 1(4), 
403-428. 

Bowlby, J. (1969). 
Attachment and loss. 
London: Hogarth Press. 
Bowlby, J. (1982). 
Attachment 
(2nd 
ed.). New York: Basic Books. 

Bradshaw, D. (1986). Immediate and prolonged effectiveness of 
negative emotion expressions in inhibiting infants’ actions 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Berkeley, CA: University of 
California, Berkeley. 

Braungart-Rieker, J. M., Hill-Soderlund, A. L., &Karrass, J. (2010). 
Fear, anger reactivity trajectories from 4 to 16 months: The roles 
of temperament, regulation, and maternal sensitivity. 
Developmental Psychology, 46, 791-804. 

Bushnell, I. W. R. (2001) Mother’s face recognition in newborn 
infants: Learning and memory. Infant Child Development, 
10, 
67-94. 


Bushnell, I. W. R., Sai, F., Mullin, J. T. (1989). Neonatal recognition 
of mother’s face. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 7, 
3-15. 


Bruer, J. T. (1999). 
The myth of the first three years: A new 
understanding of early brain development and lifelong learning. 
New York: Simon and Schuster. 

Campanella, J., & 
Rovee-Collier, C. 
(2005). Latent learning and 
deferred imitation at 3 months. Infancy, 7(3), 
243-262. Carlson, 
N. 
(2014). Foundations of behavioral neuroscience (9th 
ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson. 

Carpenter, R., McGarvey, C., Mitchell, E. A., Tappin, D. M., 
Vennemann, M. M., Smuk, M., & Carpenter, J. R. (2013). Bed sharing 


when parents do not smoke: Is there a risk of SIDS? An individual 
level analysis of five major case–control studies. BMJ Open, 
3:e002299. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-002299 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018). 
Breastfeeding 
facts. Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/
facts.html 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019). Sudden 
unexpected infant death and sudden infant death syndrome. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/sids/data.htm 


Cheour-Luhtanen, M., Alho. K., Kujala, T., Reinikainen, K., Renlund, 
M., Aaltonen, O., … & Näätänen R. (1995). Mismatch negativity 
indicates vowel discrimination in newborns. Hearing Research, 
82, 53–58. 

Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1996). 
Temperament: Theory and practice. 
New York: Brunner/Mazel. 

Chi, J. G., Dooling, E. C., & Gilles, F. H. (1977). Left-right asymmetries 
of the temporal speech areas of the human fetus. Archives of 
Neurology, 34, 346–8. 


Chien 
S. (2011). No more top-heavy bias: Infants and adults prefer 
upright faces but not top-heavy geometric or face-like 
patterns. 
Journal of Vision, 11(6):1–14. 

Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. Chomsky, N. (1972). Language and mind. NY: Harcourt 
Brace. 


Clark, E. V. (2009). What shapes children’s language? Child-directed 
speech and the process of acquisition. In V. C. M. Gathercole (Ed.), 
Routes to language: Essays in honor of Melissa Bowerman. NY: 
Psychology Press. 

Clark, L. A., Kochanska, G., & Ready, R. (2000). Mothers’ personality 
and its interaction with child temperament as predictors of 
parenting behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
79, 274–285. 

Clemson University Cooperative Extension. (2014). 
Introducing solid 
foods to infants. Retrieved from 
http://www.clemson.edu/


extension/hgic/food/nutrition/nutrition/life_stages/
hgic4102.html 

Cole, P. M., Armstrong, L. M., & Pemberton, C. K. (2010). The role 
of language in the development of emotional regulation. In S. D. 
Calkins & M. A. Bell (Eds.). Child development at intersection of 
emotion and cognition (pp. 59-77). Washington D.C.: American 
Psychological Association. 


Colvin, J.D., Collie-Akers, V., Schunn, C., & Moon, R.Y. (2014). Sleep 
environment risks for younger and older infants. 
Pediatrics 
Online. Retrieved from 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/
content/pediatrics/early/2014/07/09/peds. 2014-0401.full.pdf 


Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development concepts and 
applications (5th ed.). NJ: Pearson. 

de Boysson-Bardies, B., Sagart, L., & Durand, C. (1984). Discernible 
differences in the babbling of infants according to target 
language. Journal of Child Language, 11(1), 1–15. 


DeCasper, A. J., & Fifer, W. P. (1980). Of human bonding: Newborns 
prefer their mother’s voices. Science, 208, 1174-1176. DeCasper, 
A. J., & Spence, M. J. (1986). Prenatal maternal speech influences 
newborns’ perception of speech sounds. Infant 
Behavior and 
Development, 9, 
133-150. 


Diamond, A. (1985). Development of the ability to use recall to guide 
actions, as indicated by infants’ performance on AB. Child 
Development, 56, 868-883. 

Dobrich, W., & Scarborough, H. S. (1992). Phonological 
characteristics of words young children try to say. Journal of Child 
Language, 19(3), 597–616. 

Dubois, J., Hertz-Pannier, L., Cachia, A., 
Mangin, J. F., Le 
Bihan, D., 
& 
Dehaene-Lambertz, G. (2009). Structural asymmetries in the 
infant language and 
sensori-motor networks. 
Cerebral Cortex, 
19, 
414–423. 

Eisenberg, A., Murkoff, H. E., & Hathaway, S. E. (1989). What to 
expect the first year. New York: Workman Publishing. 


Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Shepard, S. A., Guthrie, I.K., Murphy, 


B.C., & Reiser, M. (1999). Parental reactions to children’s negative 
emotions: Longitudinal relations to quality of children’s social 
functioning. Child Development, 70, 513-534. 

Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Spinrad, T., Gershoff, E., Valiente, C., 
Losoya, S. L., Zhou, Q., 
Cumberland, A., Liew, J., Reiser, M., & 
Maxon, E. (2008). Understanding parent-adolescent conflict 
discussions: Concurrent and across-time prediction 
from youths’ 
dispositions and parenting. Monographs of the Society for 
Research in Child Development, 73, (Serial No. 290, No. 2), 1-160. 

El-Dib, M., Massaro, A. N., Glass, P., & Aly, H. (2012). Neurobehavioral 
assessment as a predictor of neurodevelopmental outcome in 
preterm infants. Journal of Perinatology, 32, 299-303. 

Eliot, L. (1999). 
What’s going on in there? 
New York: Bantam. 
Erikson, E. (1982). 
The life cycle completed. NY: Norton & 
Company. 

Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language universals: 
Language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32(5), 429–448. 

Farroni, T., Johnson, M.H. Menon, E., Zulian, L. Faraguna, D., Csibra, 
G. (2005). Newborns’ preference for face-relevant stimuli: Effects 
of contrast polarity. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 102(47), 17245-17250. 

Fergusson, D. M., & Woodward, L. J. (1999). Breastfeeding and later 
psychosocial adjustment. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 
13, 144-157. 

Fitzpatrick, E.M., Crawford, L., Ni, A., & Durieux-Smith, A. (2011). A 
descriptive analysis of language and speech skills in 4-to- 5-yr-
old children with hearing loss. Ear and Hearing, 32(2), 605-616. 

Freud, S. (1938). An outline of psychoanalysis. London: Hogarth. 

Galler J. R., & Ramsey F. (1989). A follow-up study of the influence 
of early malnutrition on development: Behavior at home and at 
school. American Academy of Child and Adolescence Psychiatry, 
28 (2), 254-61. 

Galler, J. R., Ramsey, F. C., Morely, D. S., Archer, E., & Salt, P. (1990). 
The long-term effects of early kwashiorkor compared with 


marasmus. IV. Performance on the national high school entrance 
examination. Pediatric Research, 28(3), 235- 239. 

Galler, J. R., Ramsey, F. C., Salt, P. & Archer, E. (1987). The long-
term effect of early kwashiorkor compared with marasmus. III. 
Fine motor skills. 
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology Nutrition, 
6, 855-859. 


Giedd, J. N. (2015). The amazing teen brain. Scientific American, 
312(6), 32-37. 


Giles, A., & 
Rovee-Collier, C. (2011). Infant long-term memory for 
associations formed during mere exposure. 
Infant Behavior and 
Development, 34 (2), 
327-338. 

Gillath, O., Shaver, P. R., Baek, J. M., & Chun, D. S. (2008). Genetic 
correlates of adult attachment style. Personality & Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1396–1405. 

Gleitman, L. R., & Newport, E. L. (1995). The invention of language 
by children: Environmental and biological influences on the 
acquisition of language. An Invitation to Cognitive Science, 1, 1-24. 

Goldin-
Meadow, 
S., 
& 
Mylander, 
C. 
(1998). 
Spontaneous 
sign 
systems 
created 
by 
deaf 
children 
in 
two 
cultures. 
Nature, 391(6664), 
279–281. 

Grosse, G., Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Infants 
communicate in order to be understood. Developmental 
Psychology, 46(6), 1710-1722. 


Gunderson, E. P., Hurston, S. R., Ning, X., Lo, J. C., Crites, Y., Walton, 
D…. & Quesenberry, C. P. Jr. (2015). Lactation and progression 
to type 2 diabetes mellitus after gestational diabetes mellitus: 
A prospective cohort study. American Journal of Medicine, 163, 
889-898. Doi: 10.7326/m 15-0807. 

Hainline L. (1978). Developmental changes in visual scanning of face 
and nonface patterns by infants. 
Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 25, 90–115. 

Hamer, R. (2016). The visual world of infants. Scientific American, 
104, 98-101. Harlow, H. F. (1958). The nature of love. American 
Psychologist, 13, 673-685. 



Harris, Y. R. (2005). Cognitive development. In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of human development 
(pp. 276-281). New, York: 
Sage Publications. 


Hart, S., & Carrington, H. (2002). Jealousy in 6-month-old 
infants. 
Infancy, 
3(3), 395-402. 

Hatch, E. M. (1983). Psycholinguistics: A second language 
perspective. Rowley, MA: Newbury House Publishers. Hertenstein, 
M. J., & Campos, J. J. (2004). The retention effects of an adult’s 
emotional displays on infant behavior. Child 
Development, 75(2), 
595–613. 


Holland, D., Chang, L., Ernst, T., Curan, M Dale, A. (2014). Structural 
growth trajectories and rates of change in the 
first 3 months of 
infant brain development. JAMA Neurology, 71(10), 1266-1274. 


Huttenlocher, P. R., & Dabholkar, A. S. (1997). Regional differences 
in synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex. The Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 387(2), 167-178. 

Hyde, J. S., Else-Quest, N. M., & Goldsmith, H. H. (2004). Children’s 
temperament and behavior problems predict their employed 
mothers’ work functioning. Child Development, 75, 580–594. 

Hyvärinen, L., Walthes, R., Jacob, N., Nottingham Chaplin, K., & 
Leonhardt, M. (2014). Current understanding of what infants see. 
Current Opthalmological Report, 2, 142-149. doi:10.1007/
s40135-014-0056-2 

Imai, M., Li, L., Haryu, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & 
Shigematsu, J. (2008). Novel noun and verb learning in Chinese, 
English, and Japanese children: Universality and language-
specificity in novel noun and verb learning. Child Development, 
79, 979-1000. 

Islami, F., Liu, Y., Jemal, A., Zhou, J., Weiderpass, E., Colditz, 
G…Weiss, M. (2015). Breastfeeding and breast cancer risk by 
receptor status – a systematic review and meta-analysis. Annals 
of Oncology, 26, 2398-2407. 

Iverson, J. M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Gesture paves the way 
for language development. Psychological science, 16(5), 367-371. 

Jarrett, C. (2015). 
Great myths of the brain. West Sussex, UK: Wiley. 


Johnson, M. H., & deHaan, M. (2015). Developmental cognitive 
neuroscience: An introduction. Chichester, West Sussex: UK, 
Wiley & Sons 

Jusczyk, P.W., Cutler, A., & Redanz, N.J. (1993). Infants’ preference 
for the predominant stress patterns of English words. Child 
Development, 64, 675–687. 

Karlson, E.W., Mandl, L.A., Hankison, S. E., & Grodstein, F. (2004). Do 
breast-feeding and other reproductive factors influence future 
risk of rheumatoid arthritis? Arthritis & Rheumatism, 50 (11), 
3458-3467. 

Kasprian, G., Langs, G., Brugger, P. C., Bittner, M., Weber, M., 
Arantes, M., & Prayer, D. (2011). The prenatal origin of hemispheric 
asymmetry: an in utero neuroimaging study. Cerebral Cortex, 21, 
1076–1083. 

Kiff, C. J., Lengua, L. J., & Zalewski, M. (2011). Nature and nurturing: 
Parenting in the context of child temperament. Clinical Child and 
Family Psychology Review, 14, 251–301. doi: 10.1007/
s10567-011-0093-4 

Klein, P. J., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1999). Long-term memory, forgetting, 
and deferred imitation in 12-month-old infants. Developmental 
Science, 2(1), 102-113. 


Klinnert, M. D., Campos, J. J., & Sorce, J. F. (1983). Emotions as 
behavior regulators: Social referencing in infancy. In R. Plutchik 
& H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research, and experience 
(pp. 57–86). New York, NY: Academic Press. 

Kolb, B., & 
Fantie, B. (1989). Development of the child’s brain and 
behavior. In C. R. Reynolds & E. Fletcher-Janzen (Eds.), 

Handbook of clinical child neuropsychology (pp. 17–39). New York, 
NY: Plenum Press. 

Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I. Q. (2011). An introduction to brain and 
behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Worth Publishers. 

Kopp, C. B. (2011). Development in the early years: Socialization, 
motor development, and consciousness. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 62, 165-187. 

Latham, M. C. (1997). Human nutrition in the developing world. 


Rome, IT: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. 

Lavelli, M., & Fogel, A. (2005). Developmental changes in the 
relationships between infant attention and emotion during early 
face-to-face communications: The 2 month transition. 
Developmental Psychology, 41, 265-280. 

Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. New York, 
NY: John Wiley & Sons. 

LeVine, R. A., Dixon, S., LeVine, S., Richman, A., Leiderman, P. H., 
Keefer, C. H., & Brazelton, T. B. (1994). Child care and culture: 
Lessons from Africa. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Lewis, M., & Brooks, J. (1978). Self-knowledge and emotional 
development. In M. Lewis & L. A. Rosenblum (Eds.), Genesis of 
behavior (Vol. 1, pp. 205-226). New York: Plenum Press. 

Lewis, T. L., Maurer, D., & Milewski, A. (1979). The development of 
nasal detection in young infants. Investigative Ophthalmology and 
Visual Science Supplement, 19, 271. 

Li, Y., & Ding, Y. (2017). Human visual development. In Y. Liu., & 
W. Chen (Eds.), Pediatric lens diseases (pp. 11-20). 
Singapore: 
Springer. 


Los 
Angles 
County Department of Public Health. 
(2019). 
Breastfeeding vs. formula feeding. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://publichealth.lacounty.gov/LAmoms/lessons/
Breastfeeding/6_BreastfeedingvsFormulaFeeding.pdf 

Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for identifying infants 
as disorganized/disoriented during the Ainsworth Strange 
Situation. In M. T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings 
(Eds.), Attachment inthe Preschool Years (pp.121– 160).Chicago,IL: 
UniversityofChicagoPress. 

Mandel, D. R., Jusczyk, P. W., & Pisoni, D. B. (1995). Infants’ 
recognition of the sound patterns of their own names. 
Psychological Science, 6(5), 314–317. 


Mayberry, R. I., Lock, E., & Kazmi, H. (2002). Development: Linguistic 
ability and early language exposure. Nature, 417(6884), 38. 


Moeller, M.P., & Tomblin, J.B. (2015). An introduction to the 
outcomes of children with hearing loss study. Ear and Hearing, 36 
Suppl (0-1), 4S-13S 

Morelli, G., Rogoff, B., Oppenheim, D., & Goldsmith, D. (1992). 
Cultural variations in infants’ sleeping arrangements: Questions of 
independence. 
Developmental Psychology, 28, 
604-613. 

Nelson, E. A., 
Schiefenhoevel, W., & 
Haimerl, F. (2000). Child care 
practices in 
nonindustrialized 
societies. Pediatrics, 105, e75. 

O’Connor, T. G., Marvin, R. S., Rotter, M., Olrich, J. T., Britner, P. 
A., & The English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team. 
(2003). 
Child-parent attachment following early institutional deprivation. 
Development and Psychopathology, 15, 19- 38. 


Papousek, M. (2007). Communication in early infancy: An arena of 
intersubjective learning. Infant Behavior and Development, 30, 
258-266. 

Pearson Education. (2016). 
Bayley Scales of Infant Development, 
Third Edition. New York: Pearson. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.pearsonclinical.com/childhood/products/
100000123/bayley-scales-of-infant-and-toddler-
development- 
third-edition-bayley-iii.html#tab-details 

Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and brain mechanisms. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Petitto, L. A., & Marentette, P. F. (1991). Babbling in the manual 
mode: Evidence for the ontogeny of language. Science, 251(5000), 
1493–1496. 

Phelps, B. J. (2005). Habituation. In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), Encyclopedia 
of human development (pp. 597-600). New York: Sage 
Publications. 

Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child. New York: 
Basic Books. 

Pickens, J., Field, T., Nawrocki, T., Martinez, A., Soutullo, D., & 
Gonzalez, J. (1994). Full-term and preterm infants’ perception of 
face-voice synchrony. Infant Behavior and Development, 17(4), 
447-455. 

Porter, R. H., Makin, J. W., Davis, L. M., Christensen, K. (1992). 


Responsiveness of infants to olfactory cues from lactating 
females. Infant Behavior and Development, 15, 85-93. 

Redondo, C. M., Gago-Dominguez, M., Ponte, S. M., Castelo, M. 
E., 
Jiang, X., 
Garcia, A.A… 
Castelao, J. E. (2012). Breast feeding, 
parity and breast cancer subtypes in a Spanish cohort. 
PLoS 
One, 
7(7): e40543 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.00040543 

Richardson, B. D. (1980). Malnutrition and nutritional 
anthropometry. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics, 26(3), 80-84. 
Rothbart, M. K., & Bates, J. E. (2006). Temperament. In N. 
Eisenberg (Ed.). Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3: 
Social, 
emotional, and personality development 
(6th 
ed., pp. 
99-116). 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 


Rothbart, M. K., Posner, M. I. & Kieras, J. (2006). Temperament, 
attention, and the development of self-regulation. In M. 
McCartney & D. Phillips (Eds.) Blackwell handbook of early 
childhood development (pp. 3338-357). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 

Rothbaum, F., Weisz, J., Pott, M., Miyake, K., & Morelli, G. 
(2010). 
Attachment and culture: Security in the United States and 
Japan. 
American Psychologist, 55, 1093-1104. 

Rovee-Collier, C. (1987). Learning and memory in infancy. In J. D. 
Osofsky (Ed.), Handbook of infant development, (2nd, ed., 
pp. 
98-148). New York: Wiley. 


Rovee-Collier, C. (1990). The “memory system” of prelinguistic 
infants. Annuals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 608, 
517-542. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-66231990.tb48908. 


Rovee-Collier, C., & Hayne, H. (1987). Reactivation of infant memory: 
Implications for cognitive development. In H. W. Reese (Ed.), 
Advances in child development and behavior. (Vol. 20, pp. 
185-238). London, UK: Academic Press. 

Rymer, R. (1993). Genie: A scientific tragedy. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 

Salkind, N. J. (2005). 
Encyclopedia of human development. New 
York: Sage Publications. 

Schwarz, E. B., Brown, J. S., Creasman, J. M. Stuebe, A., McClure, 


C. K., Van Den Eeden, S. K., & Thom, D. (2010). Lactation and 
maternal risk of type-2 diabetes: A population-based study. 
American Journal of Medicine, 123, 863.e1-863.e6. doi: 10.1016/
j.amjmed.2010.03.016. 


Seifer, R., Schiller, M., Sameroff, A., Resnick, S., & Riordan, K. (1996). 
Attachment, maternal sensitivity, and infant temperament during 
the first year of life. Developmental Psychology, 32, 12-25. 

Sen, M. G., Yonas, A., & Knill, D. C. (2001). Development of infants’ 
sensitivity to surface contour information for spatial layout. 
Perception, 30, 167-176. 

Senghas, R. J., Senghas, A., & Pyers, J. E. (2005). The emergence 
of Nicaraguan Sign Language: Questions of development, 
acquisition, and evolution. In S. T. Parker, J. Langer, & C. Milbrath 
(Eds.), Biology and knowledge revisited: From neurogenesis to 
psychogenesis (pp. 287–306). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 

Shaffer, D. R. (1985). 
Developmental psychology: Theory, research, 
and applications. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, Inc. Skinner, B. F. 
(1953). 
Science and human behavior. 
NY: Free Press. 

Sorce, J. F., Emde, J. J., Campos, J. J., & Klinnert, M. D. (1985). Maternal 
emotional signaling: Its effect on the visual cliff behavior of 
1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 21, 195–200. 

Spelke, E. S., & Cortelyou, A. (1981). Perceptual aspects of social 
knowing: Looking and listening in infancy. Infant social cognition, 
61-84. 

Springer, S. P. & Deutsch, G. (1993). 
Left brain, right brain 
(4th 
ed.). 
New York: W. H. Freeman. 

Stika, C.J., Eisenberg, L.S., Johnson, K.C. Henning, S.C., Colson, B.G., 
Ganguly, D.H., & DesJardin, J.L. (2015). Developmental outcomes 
of early-identified children who are hard of hearing at 12 to 18 
months of age. Early Human Development, 9(1), 47-55. 


Stork, F. & Widdowson, J. (1974). Learning about Linguistics. London: 
Hutchinson. 

Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child development. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 


Thompson, R. A. (2006). The development of the person. In W. 
Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.), 
Handbook of child psychology 
(6th 
Ed.). 
New York: Wiley. 

Thompson, R. A., & Goodvin, R. (2007). Taming the tempest in the 
teapot. In C. A. Brownell & C. B. Kopp (Eds.). Socioemotional 
development in the toddler years: Transitions and 
transformations (pp. 320-342). New York: Guilford. 


Thompson, R. A., Winer, A. C., & Goodvin, R. (2010). The individual 
child: Temperament, emotion, self, and personality. In M. 
Bornstein & M. E. Lamb (Eds.), Developmental science: An 
advanced textbook (6th ed., pp. 423–464). New York, NY: 
Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis. 

Titus-Ernstoff, L., Rees, J. R., Terry, K. L., & Cramer, D. W. (2010). 
Breast-feeding the last-born child and risk of ovarian cancer. 
Cancer Causes Control, 21(2), 201-207. doi: 10.1007/
s10552-009-9450-8 

Tomblin, J. B., Harrison, M., Ambrose, S. E., Walker, E. A., Oleson, J. 
J., & Moeller, M. P. (2015). Language outcomes in young children 
with mild to severe hearing loss. Ear and hearing, 36 Suppl 1(0 1), 
76S–91S. 

United Nations Children’s Fund. (2015). Levels and trends in child 
mortality: Report 2015. United Nations Children’s Fund. 
New York: 
NY. 


United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of 
Women’s Health. (2011). Your guide to breast feeding. 
Washington 
D.C. 


United States National Library of Medicine. 
(2016). 
Circumcision. 
Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/
circumcision.html 

Van den Boom, D. C. (1994). The influence of temperament and 
mothering on attachment and exploration: An experimental 
manipulation of sensitive responsiveness among lower-class 
mothers with irritable infants. Child Development, 65, 1457–1477. 

Van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & Sagi, A. (1999). Cross-cultural patterns 


of attachment. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of 
attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 
713-734). New York: Guilford. 

Webb, S. J., Monk, C. S., & Nelson, C. A. (2001). Mechanisms of 
postnatal neurobiological development: Implications for human 
development. Developmental Neuropsychology, 19, 147-171. 

Weekes-Shackelford, V. A. & Shackelford, T. K. (2005). Sudden Infant 
Death Syndrome (SIDS). In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of 
human development (pp. 1238-1239). New York: Sage 
Publications. 


Werker, J. F., Pegg, J. E., & McLeod, P. J. (1994). A cross-language 
investigation of infant preference for infant-directed 
communication. Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 323-333. 

Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (2002). Cross-language speech 
perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganization during the 
first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development, 25, 121-133. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 3 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 11: Cognitive 
Development in Infancy & 
Toddlerhood 

Chapter 11 Learning Objectives 

Compare the Piagetian concepts of schema, 
assimilation, and accommodation 
List and describe the six substages of sensorimotor 
intelligence 
Describe the characteristics of infant memory 
Describe components and developmental 
progression of language 
Identify and compare the theories of language 


Piaget and the Sensorimotor Stage 

Schema, Assimilation, and Accommodation 

Piaget believed that we are continuously trying to maintain 


cognitive equilibrium, or a balance, in what we see and what we 
know (Piaget, 1954). Children have much more of a challenge in 
maintaining this balance because they are constantly being 
confronted with new situations, new words, new objects, etc. All 
this new information needs to be organized, and a framework for 
organizing information is referred to as a schema. Children develop 
schemata through the processes of assimilation and 
accommodation. 

Figure 3.14 

When faced with something new, a child may demonstrate 
assimilation, which is fitting the new information into an existing 
schema, such as calling all animals with four legs “doggies” because 
he or she knows the word doggie. Instead of assimilating the 


According to the Piagetian perspective, infants learn about the 
world primarily through their senses and motor abilities (Harris, 
2005). These basic motor and sensory abilities provide the 
foundation for the cognitive skills that will emerge during the 
information, the child may demonstrate accommodation, which is 
expanding the framework of knowledge to accommodate the new 
situation and thus learning a new word to more accurately name 
the animal. For example, recognizing that a horse is different from 
a zebra means the child has accommodated, and now the child 
has both a zebra schema and a horse schema. Even as adults we 
continue to try and “make sense” of new situations by determining 
whether they fit into our old way of thinking (assimilation) or 
whether we need to modify our thoughts (accommodation). 
subsequent stages of cognitive development. The first stage of 
cognitive development is referred to as the sensorimotor stage and 
it occurs through six substages. Table 3.2 identifies the ages 
typically associated with each substage. 

Table 3.2 


Substage 1: Reflexes. Newborns learn about their world through the 
use of their reflexes, such as when sucking, reaching, and grasping. 
Eventually the use of these reflexes becomes more deliberate and 
purposeful. 

Substage 2: Primary Circular Reactions. During these next 3 
months, the infant begins to actively involve his or her own body in 
some form of repeated activity. An infant may accidentally engage in 


a behavior and find it interesting such as making a vocalization. This 
interest motivates trying to do it again and helps the infant learn 
a new behavior that originally occurred by chance. The behavior 
is identified as circular because of the repetition, and as primary 
because it centers on the infant’s own body. 

Substage 3: Secondary Circular Reactions. The infant begins to 
interact with objects in the environment. At first the infant interacts 
with objects (e.g., a crib mobile) accidentally, but then these 
contacts with the objects are deliberate and become a repeated 
activity. The infant becomes more and more actively engaged in 
the outside world and takes delight in being able to make things 
happen. Repeated motion brings particular interest as, for example, 
the infant is able to bang two lids together from the cupboard when 
seated on the kitchen floor. 

Substage 4: Coordination of Secondary Circular Reactions. The 
infant combines these basic reflexes and simple behaviors and uses 


planning and coordination to achieve a specific goal. Now the infant 
can engage in behaviors that others perform and anticipate 
upcoming events. Perhaps because of continued maturation of the 
prefrontal cortex, the infant becomes capable of having a thought 
and carrying out a planned, goal-directed activity. For example, 
an infant sees a toy car under the kitchen table and then crawls, 
reaches, and grabs the toy. The infant is coordinating both internal 
and external activities to achieve a planned goal. 

Substage 5: Tertiary Circular Reactions. The toddler is considered 
a “little scientist” and begins exploring the world in a trial-and-
error manner, using both motor skills and planning abilities. For 
example, the child might throw her ball down the stairs to see what 
happens. The toddler’s active engagement in experimentation helps 
them learn about their world. 

Substage 6: Beginning of Representational Thought. The 
sensorimotor period ends with the appearance of symbolic or 
representational thought. The toddler now has a basic 
understanding that objects can be used as symbols. Additionally, the 
child is able to solve problems using mental strategies, to remember 
something heard days before and repeat it, and to engage in pretend 
play. This initial movement from a “hands-on” approach to knowing 
about the world to the more mental world of substage six marks the 
transition to preoperational thought. 


Development of Object Permanence 

A critical milestone during the sensorimotor period is the 
development of object permanence. Object permanence is the 
understanding that even if something is out of sight, it still exists 
(Bogartz, Shinskey, & Schilling, 2000). According to Piaget, young 
infants do not remember an object after it has been removed from 
sight. Piaget studied infants’reactions when a toy was first shown 
to them and then hidden under a blanket. Infants who had already 
developed object permanence would reach for the hidden toy, 
indicating that they knew it still existed, whereas infants who had 
not developed object permanence would appear confused. Piaget 
emphasizes this construct because it was an objective way for 
children to demonstrate that they can mentally represent their 
world. Children have typically acquired this milestone by 8 months. 
Once toddlers have mastered object permanence, they enjoy games 
like hide and seek, and they realize that when someone leaves the 
room they will come back. Toddlers also point to pictures in books 
and look at inappropriate places when you ask them to find objects. 

In Piaget’s view, around the same time children develop object 
permanence, they also begin to exhibit stranger anxiety, which is 
a fear of unfamiliar people (Crain, 2005). Babies may demonstrate 
this by crying and turning away from a stranger, by clinging to 
a caregiver, or by attempting to reach their arms toward familiar 
faces, such as parents. Stranger anxiety results when a child is 
unable to assimilate the stranger into an existing schema; therefore, 
she cannot predict what her experience with that stranger will be 
like, which results in a fear response. 

Critique of Piaget 

Piaget thought that children’s ability to understand objects, such as 


learning that a rattle makes a noise when shaken, was a cognitive 
skill that develops slowly as a child matures and interacts with the 
environment. Today, developmental psychologists think Piaget was 
incorrect. Researchers have found that even very young children 
understand objects and how they work long before they have 
experience with those objects (Baillargeon, 1987; Baillargeon, Li, 
Gertner, & Wu, 2011). For example, Piaget believed that infants did 
not fully master object permanence until substage 5 of the 
sensorimotor period (Thomas, 1979). However, infants seem to be 
able to recognize that objects have permanence at much younger 
ages. Diamond (1985) found that infants show earlier knowledge if 
the waiting period is shorter. At age 6 months, they retrieved the 
hidden object if their wait for retrieving the object is no longer than 
2 seconds, and at 7 months if the wait is no longer than 4 seconds. 

Others have found that children as young as 3 months old have 
demonstrated knowledge of the properties of objects that they had 
only viewed and did not have prior experience with. In one study, 
3-month-old infants were shown a truck rolling down a track and 
behind a screen. The box, which appeared solid but was actually 
hollow, was placed next to the track. The truck rolled past the box as 
would be expected. Then the box was placed on the track to block 
the path of the truck. When the truck was rolled down the track 
this time, it continued unimpeded. The infants spent significantly 
more time looking at this impossible event (Figure 3.17). Baillargeon 
(1987) concluded that they knew solid objects cannot pass through 
each other. Baillargeon’s findings suggest that very young children 
have an understanding of objects and how they work, which Piaget 
(1954) would have said is beyond their cognitive abilities due to their 
limited experiences in the world. 

Figure 3.17 


Infant Memory 

Memory requires a certain degree of brain maturation, so it should 
not be surprising that infant memory is rather fleeting and fragile. 
As a result, older children and adults experience infantile amnesia, 
the inability to recall memories from the first few years of life. 
Several hypotheses have been proposed for this amnesia. From the 
biological perspective, it has been suggested that infantile amnesia 
is due to the immaturity of the infant brain, especially those areas 
that are crucial 
to the formation of autobiographical memory, such 
as the hippocampus. From the cognitive perspective, it has been 
suggested that the lack of linguistic skills of babies and toddlers 
limit their ability to mentally represent events; thereby, reducing 
their ability to encode memory. Moreover, even if infants do form 
such early memories, older children and adults may not be able to 
access them because they may be employing very different, more 
linguistically based, retrieval cues than infants used when forming 
the memory. Finally, social theorists argue that episodic memories 
of personal experiences may hinge on an understanding of “self”, 
something that is clearly lacking in infants and young toddlers. 

However, in a series of clever studies Carolyn Rovee-Collier and 
her colleagues have demonstrated that infants can remember 
events from their life, even if these memories are shortlived. Three-
month-old infants were taught that they could make a mobile hung 


if the first mobile had had yellow blocks with blue letters, but at 
the later retrieval session the blocks were blue with yellow letters, 
the babies would not kick. Infants older than 6 months of age can 
retain information for longer periods of time; they also need less 
over their crib shake by kicking their legs. The infants were placed 
in their crib, on their backs. A ribbon was tied to one foot and the 
other end to a mobile. At first infants made random movements, but 
then came to realize that by kicking they could make the mobile 
shake. After two 9-minute sessions with the mobile, the mobile was 
removed. One week later the mobile was reintroduced to one group 
of infants and most of the babies immediately started kicking their 
legs, indicating that they remembered their prior experience with 
the mobile. The second group of infants was shown on the mobile 
two weeks later, and the babies made only random movements. The 
memory had faded (Rovee-Collier, 1987; Giles & Rovee-Collier, 2011). 
Rovee-Collier and Hayne (1987) found that 3-month-olds could 
remember the mobile after two weeks if they were shown the 
mobile and watched it move, even though they were not tied to 
it. This reminder helped most infants to remember the connection 
between their kicking and the movement of the mobile. Like many 
researchers of infant memory, Rovee-Collier (1990) found infant 
memory to be very context-dependent. In other words, the sessions 
with the mobile and the later retrieval sessions had to be conducted 
under very similar circumstances or else the babies would not 
remember their prior experiences with the mobile. For instance, 
reminding to retrieve information in memory. 

Infants older than 6 months of age can retain information for 
longer periods of time; they also need less reminding to retrieve 
information in memory. Studies of deferred imitation, that is, the 
imitation of actions after a time delay, can occur as early as six 
months of age (Campanella & Rovee-Collier, 2005), but only if 
infants are allowed to practice the behavior they were shown. By 12 
months of age, infants no longer need to practice the behavior in 
order to retain memory for four weeks (Klein & Meltzoff, 1999). 


Language 

Our vast intelligence also allows us to have language, a system 
of communication that uses symbols in a regular way to create 
meaning. Language gives us the ability to communicate our 
intelligence to others by talking, reading, and writing. Although 
other species have at least some ability to communicate, none of 
them have language. There are many components of language that 
will now be reviewed. 

Components of Language 

Phoneme: A phoneme is the smallest unit of sound that makes 
a meaningful difference in a language. The word “bit” has three 
phonemes. In spoken languages, phonemes are produced by the 
positions and movements of the vocal tract, including our lips, 
teeth, tongue, vocal cords, and throat, whereas in sign language 
phonemes are defined by the shapes and movement of the hands. 


There are hundreds of unique phonemes that can be made by 
human speakers, but most languages only use a small subset of the 
possibilities. English contains about 45 phonemes, whereas other 
languages have as few as 15 and others more than 60. The Hawaiian 
language contains fewer phonemes as it includes only 5 vowels (a, e, 
i, o, and u) and 7 consonants (h, k, l, m, n, p, and w). 

Infants are born able to detect all phonemes, but they lose their 
ability to do so as they get older; by 10 months of age, a child’s 
ability to recognize phonemes becomes very similar to that of the 
adult speakers of the native language. Phonemes that were initially 
differentiated come to be treated as equivalent (Werker & Tees, 
2002). 

Morpheme: Whereas phonemes are the smallest units of sound 
in language, a morpheme is a string of one or more phonemes 
that makes up the smallest units of meaning in a language. Some 
morphemes are prefixes and suffixes used to modify other words. 
For example, the syllable “re-” as in “rewrite” or “repay” means “to 


do again,” and the suffix “-est” as in “happiest” or “coolest” means 
“to the maximum.” 

Semantics: Semantics refers to the set of rules we use to obtain 
meaning from morphemes. For example, adding “ed” to the end of a 
verb makes it past tense. 

Syntax: Syntax is the set of rules of a language by which we 
construct sentences. Each language has a different syntax. The 
syntax of the English language requires that each sentence has a 
noun and a verb, each of which may be modified by adjectives 
and adverbs. Some syntaxes make use of the order in which words 
appear. For example, in English, the meaning of the sentence “The 
man bites the dog” is different from “The dog bites the man.” 

Pragmatics: The social side of language is expressed through 
pragmatics, or how we communicate effectively and appropriately 
with others. Examples of pragmatics include turn taking, staying on 
topic, volume and tone of voice, and appropriate eye contact. 

Lastly, words do not possess fixed meanings but change their 
interpretation as a function of the context in which they are spoken. 
We use contextual information, the information surrounding 
language, to help us interpret it. Examples of contextual information 
include our knowledge and nonverbal expressions, such as facial 
expressions, postures, and gestures. Misunderstandings can easily 
arise if people are not attentive to contextual information or if some 
of it is missing, such as it may be in newspaper headlines or in text 
messages. 

Language Developmental Progression 

An important aspect of cognitive development is language 
acquisition. The order in which children learn language structures 
is consistent across children and cultures (Hatch, 1983). Starting 
before birth, babies begin to develop language and communication 
skills. At birth, babies recognize their mother’s voice and can 


discriminate between the language(s) spoken by their mothers and 
foreign languages, and they show preferences for faces that are 
moving in synchrony with audible language (Blossom & Morgan, 
2006; Pickens et al., 1994; Spelke & Cortelyou, 1981). 

Do newborns communicate? Of course, they do. They do not, 
however, communicate with the use of oral language. Instead, they 
communicate their thoughts and needs with body posture (being 
relaxed or still), gestures, cries, and facial expressions. A person who 
spends adequate time with an infant can learn which cries indicate 
pain and which ones indicate hunger, discomfort, or frustration. 

Intentional Vocalizations: In terms of producing spoken language, 
babies begin to coo almost immediately. Cooing is a one-syllable 
combination of a consonant and a vowel sound (e.g., coo or ba). 
Interestingly, babies replicate sounds from their own languages. 
A baby whose parents speak French will coo in a different tone 
than a baby whose parents speak Spanish or Urdu. These gurgling, 
musical vocalizations can serve as a source of entertainment to an 
infant who has been laid down for a nap or seated in a carrier on 
a car ride. Cooing serves as practice for vocalization, as well as the 
infant hears the sound of his or her own voice and tries to repeat 
sounds that are entertaining. Infants also begin to learn the pace 
and pause of conversation as they alternate their vocalization with 


that of someone else and then take their turn again when the other 
person’s vocalization has stopped. 


At about four to six months of age, infants begin making even more 
elaborate vocalizations that include the sounds required for any 
language. Guttural sounds, clicks, consonants, and vowel sounds 
stand ready to equip the child with the ability to repeat whatever 
sounds are characteristic of the language heard. Eventually, these 
sounds will no longer be used as the infant grows more accustomed 
to a particular language. 

At about 7 months, infants begin babbling, engaging in intentional 
vocalizations that lack specific meaning and comprise a consonant-
vowel repeated sequence, such as ma-ma-ma, da-da-da. Children 
babble as practice in creating specific sounds, and by the time 
they are a 1-year-old, the babbling uses primarily the sounds of 
the language that they are learning (de Boysson- Bardies, Sagart, 
& Durand, 1984). These vocalizations have a conversational tone 
that sounds meaningful even though it is not. Babbling also helps 
children understand the social, communicative function of 
language. Children who are exposed to sign language babble in sign 
by making hand movements that represent real language (Petitto & 
Marentette, 1991). 

Gesturing: Children communicate information through gesturing 
long before they speak, and there is some evidence that gesture 
usage predicts subsequent language development (Iverson & 
Goldin-Meadow, 2005). Deaf babies also use gestures to 
communicate wants, reactions, and feelings. Because gesturing 
seems to be easier than vocalization for some toddlers, sign 
language is sometimes taught to enhance one’s ability to 
communicate by making use of the ease of gesturing. The rhythm 
and pattern of language are used when deaf babies sign, just as it is 
when hearing babies babble. 


Understanding: 
At around ten months of age, the infant 
can 


understand more than he or she can say, which is referred to 
as 
receptive language. You may have experienced this phenomenon 
as well if you have ever tried to learn a second language. You may 
have been able to follow a conversation more easily than contribute 
to it. One of the first words that children understand is their own 
name, usually by about 6 months, followed by commonly used words 
like “bottle,” “mama,” and “doggie” by 10 to 12 months 
(Mandel, 
Jusczyk, & 
Pisoni, 1995). 

Infants shake their head “no” around 6–9 months, and they respond 
to verbal requests to do things like “wave bye-bye” or “blow a kiss” 
around 9–12 months. Children also use contextual information, 
particularly the cues that parents provide, to help them learn the 
language. Children learn that people are usually referring to things 
that they are looking at when they are speaking (Baldwin, 1993), 
and that that the speaker’s emotional expressions are related to the 
content of their speech. 

Holophrastic Speech: Children begin using their first words at 
about 12 or 13 months of age and may use partial words to convey 
thoughts at even younger ages. These one-word expressions are 
referred to as holophrasic speech. For example, the child may say 
“ju” for the word “juice” and use this sound when referring to a 
bottle. The listener must interpret the meaning of the holophrase, 
and when this is someone who has spent time with the child, 
interpretation is not too difficult. But, someone who has not been 
around the child will have trouble knowing what is meant. Imagine 
the parent who to a friend exclaims, “Ezra’s talking all the time now!” 
The friend hears only “ju da ga” to which the parent explains means, 
“I want some milk when I go with Daddy.” 

Language Errors: 
The early utterances of children contain many 
errors, for instance, confusing /b/ and /d/, or /c/ and /z/. The 
words children create are often simplified, in part because they 
are not yet able to make the more complex sounds of the real 
language (Dobrich & Scarborough, 1992). Children may say “keekee” 


for kitty, “nana” for banana, and “vesketti” for spaghetti because 
it is easier. Often these early words are accompanied by gestures 
that may also be easier to produce than the words themselves. 
Children’s pronunciations become increasingly accurate between 1 
and 3 years, but some problems may persist until school age. 


A child who learns that a word stands for an object may initially 
think that the word can be used for only that particular object, 
which is referred to as underextension. Only the family’s Irish Setter 
is a “doggie”, for example. More often, however, a child may think 
that a label applies to all objects that are similar to the original 
object, which is called overextension. For example, all animals 
become “doggies”. The first error is often the result of children 
learning the meaning of a word in a specific context, while the 
second language error is a function of the child’s smaller vocabulary. 

First words and cultural influences: If the child is using English, 
first words tend to be nouns. The child labels objects such as a 
cup, ball, or other items that they regularly interact with. In a verb-
friendly language such as Chinese, however, children may learn 
more verbs. This may also be due to the different emphasis given to 
objects based on culture. Chinese children may be taught to notice 
action and relationships between objects, while children from the 
United States may be taught to name an object and its qualities 
(color, texture, size, etc.). These differences can be seen when 
comparing interpretations of art by older students from China and 
the United States (Imai et al., 2008). 


Two-word sentences and telegraphic (text message) speech: By the 
time they become toddlers, children have a vocabulary of about 
50-200 words and begin putting those words together in 
telegraphic speech, such as “baby bye-bye” or “doggie pretty”. 
Words needed to convey messages are used, but the articles and 
other parts of speech necessary for grammatical correctness are 
not yet used. These expressions sound like a telegraph, or perhaps 
a better analogy today would be that they read like a text message. 


Telegraphic speech/text message speech occurs when unnecessary 
words are not used. “Give baby ball” is used rather than “Give the 
baby the ball.” 

Infant-directed Speech: 
Why is a horse a “horsie”? Have you ever 
wondered why adults tend to use “baby talk” or that sing-song type 
of intonation and exaggeration used when talking to children? This 
represents a universal tendency and is known as infant-directed 
speech. It involves exaggerating the vowel and consonant sounds, 
using a high-pitched voice, and delivering the phrase with great 
facial expression (Clark, 2009). Why is this done? Infants are 
frequently more attuned to the tone of voice of the person speaking 
than to the content of the words themselves and are aware of 
the target of speech. Werker, Pegg, and McLeod (1994) found that 
infants listened longer to a woman who was speaking to a baby than 
to a woman who was speaking to another adult. Adults may use this 
form of speech in order to clearly articulate the sounds of a word so 
that the child can hear the sounds involved. It may also be because 
when this type of speech is used, the infant pays more attention to 
the speaker and this sets up a pattern of interaction in which the 
speaker and listener are in tune with one another. 

Theories of Language Development 

Psychological theories of language learning differ in terms of the 
importance they place on nature and nurture. Remember that we 
are a product of both nature and nurture. Researchers now believe 
that language acquisition is partially inborn and partially learned 
through our interactions with our linguistic environment (Gleitman 
& Newport, 1995; Stork & Widdowson, 1974). First to be discussed 
are the biological theories, including nativist, brain areas, and 
critical periods. Next, learning theory and social pragmatics will be 
presented. 


Nativism: The linguist Noam Chomsky is a believer in the natural 
approach to language, arguing that human brains contain a 
language acquisition device (LAD) that includes a universal grammar 
that underlies all human language (Chomsky, 1965, 1972). According 
to this approach, each of the many languages spoken around the 
world (there are between 6,000 and 8,000) is an individual example 
of the same underlying set of procedures that are hardwired into 
human brains. Chomsky’s account proposes that children are born 
with a knowledge of general rules of syntax that determine how 
sentences are constructed. Language develops as long as the infant 
is exposed to it. No teaching, training, or reinforcement is required 
for language to develop as proposed by Skinner. 


Chomsky differentiates between the deep structure of an idea; that 
is, how the idea is represented in the fundamental universal 
grammar that is common to all languages, and the surface structure 
of the idea or how it is expressed in any one language. Once we 
hear or express a thought in surface structure, we generally forget 
exactly how it happened. At the end of a lecture, you will remember 
a lot of the deep structure (i.e., the ideas expressed by the 
instructor), but you cannot reproduce the surface structure (the 
exact words that the instructor used to communicate the ideas). 


Although there is general agreement among psychologists that 
babies are genetically programmed to learn language, there is still 
debate about Chomsky’s idea that there is a universal grammar that 
can account for all language learning. Evans and Levinson (2009) 
surveyed the world’s languages and found that none of the 
presumed underlying features of the language acquisition device 
were entirely universal. In their search, they found languages that 
did not have noun or verb phrases, that did not have tenses (e.g., 
past, present, future), and even some that did not have nouns or 
verbs at all, even though a basic assumption of a universal grammar 
is that all languages should share these features. 

Brain Areas for Language: For the 90% of people who are right-


handed, language is stored and controlled by the left cerebral 
cortex, although for some left-handers this pattern is reversed. 
These differences can easily be seen in the results of neuroimaging 
studies that show that listening to and producing language creates 
greater activity in the left hemisphere than in the 
right. 
Broca’s 
area, 
an area in front of the left hemisphere near the 
motor cortex, 
is responsible for language production 
(Figure 3.20). 

Figure 3.20 Drawing of Brain Showing Broca’s and Wernicke’s Area 

This area was first localized in the 1860s by the French physician 
Paul Broca, who studied patients with lesions to various parts of 
the brain. Wernicke’s area, an area of the brain next to the auditory 
cortex, is 
responsible for language comprehension. 



Is there a critical period for learning a language? Psychologists 
believe there is a critical period, a time in which learning can easily 
occur, for language. This critical period appears to be between 
infancy and puberty (Lenneberg, 1967; Penfield & Roberts, 1959), but 
isolating the exact timeline has been elusive. Children who are not 
exposed to language early in their lives will likely never grasp the 
grammatical and communication nuances of language. Case studies, 
including Victor the “Wild Child,” who has abandoned as a baby in 
18th century France and not discovered until he was 12, and Genie, 
a child whose parents kept her locked away from 18 months until 
13 years of age, are two examples of children who were deprived of 
language. Both children made some progress in socialization after 
they were rescued, but neither of them ever developed a working 
understanding of language (Rymer, 1993). Yet, such case studies are 
fraught with many confounds. How much did the years of social 
isolation and malnutrition contribute to their problems in language 
development? 



A better test for the notion of critical periods for language is found 
in studies of children with hearing loss. Several studies show that 
the earlier children are diagnosed with hearing impairment and 
receive treatment, the better the child’s long-term language 
development. For instance, Stika et al. (2015) reported that when 
children’s hearing loss was identified during newborn screening, 
and subsequently addressed, the majority showed normal language 
development when later tested at 12-18 months. Fitzpatrick, 
Crawford, Ni, and Durieux-Smith (2011) reported that early language 
intervention in children who were moderately to severely hard of 
hearing, demonstrated normal outcomes in language proficiency 
by 4 to 5 years of age. Tomblin et al. (2015) reported that children 
who were fit with hearing aids by 6 months of age showed good 
levels of language development by age 2. Those whose hearing was 
not corrected until after 18 months showed lower language 
performance, even in the early preschool years. However, this study 
did reveal that those whose hearing was corrected by toddlerhood 
had greatly improved language skills by age 6. The research with 
hearing impaired children reveals that this critical period for 
language development is not exclusive to infancy, and that the brain 
is still receptive to language development in early childhood. 
Fortunately, it is has become routine to screen hearing in newborns, 
because when hearing loss is not treated early, it can delay spoken 
language, literacy, and impact children’s social skills (Moeller & 
Tomblin, 2015). 


Learning Theory: 
Perhaps the most straightforward explanation of 
language development is that it occurs through the principles of 
learning, including association and reinforcement (Skinner, 1953). 
Additionally, Bandura (1977) described the importance of 
observation and imitation of others in learning language. There 
must be at least some truth to the idea that language is learned 
through environmental interactions or nurture. Children learn the 
language that they hear spoken around them rather than some 
other language. Also supporting this idea is the gradual 


improvement of language skills with time. It seems that children 
modify their language through imitation and reinforcement, such as 
parental praise and being understood. For example, when a two-
year-old child asks for juice, he might say, “me juice,” to which his 
mother might respond by giving him a cup of apple juice. 

Figure 3.22 Three Theorists who provide explanations for language 
development 

However, language cannot be entirely learned. For one, children 
learn words too fast for them to be learned through reinforcement. 
Between the ages of 18 months and 5 years, children learn up to 10 
new words every day (Anglin, 1993). More importantly, language is 
more generative than it is imitative. Language is not a predefined 
set of ideas and sentences that we choose when we 
need them, but 
rather a system of rules and procedures that allows us to create an 
infinite number of statements, thoughts, and ideas, including those 
that have never previously occurred. When a child says that she 
“swimmed” in the pool, for instance, she is showing generativity. No 
adult speaker of English would ever say “swimmed,” yet it is easily 
generated from the normal system of producing language. 


Other evidence that refutes the idea that all language is learned 
through experience comes from the observation that children may 


learn languages better than they ever hear them. Deaf children 
whose parents do not communicate using ASL very well 
nevertheless are able to learn it perfectly on their own and may 
even make up their own language if they need to (Goldin-Meadow 
& Mylander, 1998). A group of deaf children in a school in Nicaragua, 
whose teachers could not sign, invented a way to communicate 
through made-up signs (Senghas, 
Senghas, & 
Pyers, 2005). The 
development of this new Nicaraguan Sign Language has continued 
and changed as new generations of students have come to the 
school and started using the language. Although the original system 
was not a real language, it is becoming closer and closer every year, 
showing the development of a new language in modern times. 

Social pragmatics: Another view emphasizes the very social nature 
of human language. Language from this view is not only a cognitive 
skill but also a social one. A language is a tool humans use to 
communicate, connect to, influence and inform others. Most of 
all, language comes out of a need to cooperate. The social nature 
of language has been demonstrated by a number of studies that 
have shown that children use several pre-linguistic skills (such as 
pointing and other gestures) to communicate not only their own 
needs but what others may need. So, a child watching her mother 
search for an object may point to the object to help her mother find 
it. Eighteen-month to 30-month-olds have been shown to make 
linguistic repairs when it is clear that another person does not 
understand them (Grosse, Behne, Carpenter & Tomasello, 2010). 
Grosse et al. (2010) found that even when the child was given the 
desired object if there had been any misunderstanding along the 
way (such as a delay in being handed the object, or the experimenter 
calling the object by the wrong name), children would make 
linguistic repairs. This would suggest that children are using 
language not only as a means of achieving some material goal, but 
to make themselves understood in the mind of another person. 



References 

Ainsworth, M. (1979). Infant-mother attachment. American 
Psychologist, 34(10), 932-937. 

Ainsworth, M., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of 
attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Akimoto, S. A., & Sanbinmatsu, D. M. (1999). Differences in self-
effacing behavior between European and Japanese Americans: 
Effect on competence evaluations. Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology, 30, 159-177. 

American Optometric Association. (2019). 
Infant vision: Birth to 24 
months of age. Retrieved from 
https://www.aoa.org/patients-
and-public/good-vision-throughout-life/childrens-vision/
infant-vision-birth-to-24- 
months-of-age 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). 
Diagnostic 
and 
statistical 
manual of 
mental 
disorders, 5th 
edition (DSM-5). 

Washington, DC: Author. 

Anglin, J. M. (1993). Vocabulary development: A morphological 
analysis. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child 
Development, 58 10), v–165. 

Aslin, R. N. (1981). Development of smooth pursuit in human infants. 
In D. F. Fisher, R. A. Monty, & J. W. Senders (Eds.), Eye movements: 
Cognition and visual perception (pp. 31– 51). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 

Atkinson, J., & Braddick, O. (2003). Neurobiological models of normal 
and abnormal visual development. In M. de Haan & M. H. Johnson 
(Eds.), 
The cognitive neuroscience of development 
(pp. 43– 71). 
Hove: Psychology Press. 

Baillargeon, R. (1987. Object permanence in 3 ½ and 4 ½ year-old 
infants. Developmental Psychology, 22, 655-664. Baillargeon, R., 
Li, J., Gertner, Y, & Wu, D. (2011). How do infants reason about 
physical events? In U. Goswami (Ed.), The 
Wiley-Blackwell 
handbook of childhood cognitive development. MA: John Wiley. 


Balaban, M. T. & Reisenauer, C. D. (2013). Sensory development. 


In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), Encyclopedia of human development 
(pp. 
1144-1147). New, York: Sage Publications. 


Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Early referential understanding: Infants’ ability 
to recognize referential acts for what they are. Developmental 
Psychology, 29(5), 832–843. 


Bandura, A. (1977). 
Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 

Bartrip J, Morton J, & De Schonen S. (2001). Responses to mother’s 
face in 3-week to 5-month-old infants. British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology, 19, 219–232 

Berk, L. E. (2007). 
Development through the life span 
(4th ed.). 
Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Berne, S. A. (2006). The primitive reflexes: Considerations in the 
infant. Optometry & Vision Development, 37(3), 139-145. Bloem, 
M. (2007). The 2006 WHO child growth standards. BMJ 
: British 
Medical Journal, 334(7596), 705–706. 
http://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.39155.658843.BE 


Blossom, M., & Morgan, J. L. (2006). Does the face say what the 
mouth says? A study of infants’ sensitivity to visual prosody. In 
the 30th annual Boston University conference on language 
development, Somerville, MA. 


Bogartz, R. S., Shinskey, J. L., & Schilling, T. (2000). Object 
permanence in five-and-a-half month old infants. Infancy, 1(4), 
403-428. 

Bowlby, J. (1969). 
Attachment and loss. 
London: Hogarth Press. 
Bowlby, J. (1982). 
Attachment 
(2nd 
ed.). New York: Basic Books. 

Bradshaw, D. (1986). Immediate and prolonged effectiveness of 
negative emotion expressions in inhibiting infants’ actions 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Berkeley, CA: University of 
California, Berkeley. 

Braungart-Rieker, J. M., Hill-Soderlund, A. L., &Karrass, J. (2010). 
Fear, anger reactivity trajectories from 4 to 16 months: The roles 
of temperament, regulation, and maternal sensitivity. 
Developmental Psychology, 46, 791-804. 

Bushnell, I. W. R. (2001) Mother’s face recognition in newborn 


infants: Learning and memory. Infant Child Development, 
10, 
67-94. 


Bushnell, I. W. R., Sai, F., Mullin, J. T. (1989). Neonatal recognition 
of mother’s face. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 7, 
3-15. 


Bruer, J. T. (1999). 
The myth of the first three years: A new 
understanding of early brain development and lifelong learning. 
New York: Simon and Schuster. 

Campanella, J., & 
Rovee-Collier, C. 
(2005). Latent learning and 
deferred imitation at 3 months. Infancy, 7(3), 
243-262. Carlson, 
N. 
(2014). Foundations of behavioral neuroscience (9th 
ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson. 

Carpenter, R., McGarvey, C., Mitchell, E. A., Tappin, D. M., 
Vennemann, M. M., Smuk, M., & Carpenter, J. R. (2013). Bed sharing 
when parents do not smoke: Is there a risk of SIDS? An individual 
level analysis of five major case–control studies. BMJ Open, 
3:e002299. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-002299 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018). 
Breastfeeding 
facts. Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/
facts.html 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019). Sudden 
unexpected infant death and sudden infant death syndrome. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/sids/data.htm 


Cheour-Luhtanen, M., Alho. K., Kujala, T., Reinikainen, K., Renlund, 
M., Aaltonen, O., … & Näätänen R. (1995). Mismatch negativity 
indicates vowel discrimination in newborns. Hearing Research, 
82, 53–58. 

Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1996). 
Temperament: Theory and practice. 
New York: Brunner/Mazel. 

Chi, J. G., Dooling, E. C., & Gilles, F. H. (1977). Left-right asymmetries 
of the temporal speech areas of the human fetus. Archives of 
Neurology, 34, 346–8. 


Chien 
S. (2011). No more top-heavy bias: Infants and adults prefer 


upright faces but not top-heavy geometric or face-like 
patterns. 
Journal of Vision, 11(6):1–14. 

Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. Chomsky, N. (1972). Language and mind. NY: Harcourt 
Brace. 


Clark, E. V. (2009). What shapes children’s language? Child-directed 
speech and the process of acquisition. In V. C. M. Gathercole (Ed.), 
Routes to language: Essays in honor of Melissa Bowerman. NY: 
Psychology Press. 

Clark, L. A., Kochanska, G., & Ready, R. (2000). Mothers’ personality 
and its interaction with child temperament as predictors of 
parenting behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
79, 274–285. 

Clemson University Cooperative Extension. (2014). 
Introducing solid 
foods to infants. Retrieved from 
http://www.clemson.edu/
extension/hgic/food/nutrition/nutrition/life_stages/
hgic4102.html 

Cole, P. M., Armstrong, L. M., & Pemberton, C. K. (2010). The role 
of language in the development of emotional regulation. In S. D. 
Calkins & M. A. Bell (Eds.). Child development at intersection of 
emotion and cognition (pp. 59-77). Washington D.C.: American 
Psychological Association. 


Colvin, J.D., Collie-Akers, V., Schunn, C., & Moon, R.Y. (2014). Sleep 
environment risks for younger and older infants. 
Pediatrics 
Online. Retrieved from 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/
content/pediatrics/early/2014/07/09/peds. 2014-0401.full.pdf 


Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development concepts and 
applications (5th ed.). NJ: Pearson. 

de Boysson-Bardies, B., Sagart, L., & Durand, C. (1984). Discernible 
differences in the babbling of infants according to target 
language. Journal of Child Language, 11(1), 1–15. 


DeCasper, A. J., & Fifer, W. P. (1980). Of human bonding: Newborns 
prefer their mother’s voices. Science, 208, 1174-1176. DeCasper, 
A. J., & Spence, M. J. (1986). Prenatal maternal speech influences 


newborns’ perception of speech sounds. Infant 
Behavior and 
Development, 9, 
133-150. 


Diamond, A. (1985). Development of the ability to use recall to guide 
actions, as indicated by infants’ performance on AB. Child 
Development, 56, 868-883. 

Dobrich, W., & Scarborough, H. S. (1992). Phonological 
characteristics of words young children try to say. Journal of Child 
Language, 19(3), 597–616. 

Dubois, J., Hertz-Pannier, L., Cachia, A., 
Mangin, J. F., Le 
Bihan, D., 
& 
Dehaene-Lambertz, G. (2009). Structural asymmetries in the 
infant language and 
sensori-motor networks. 
Cerebral Cortex, 
19, 
414–423. 

Eisenberg, A., Murkoff, H. E., & Hathaway, S. E. (1989). What to 
expect the first year. New York: Workman Publishing. 


Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Shepard, S. A., Guthrie, I.K., Murphy, 
B.C., & Reiser, M. (1999). Parental reactions to children’s negative 
emotions: Longitudinal relations to quality of children’s social 
functioning. Child Development, 70, 513-534. 

Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Spinrad, T., Gershoff, E., Valiente, C., 
Losoya, S. L., Zhou, Q., 
Cumberland, A., Liew, J., Reiser, M., & 
Maxon, E. (2008). Understanding parent-adolescent conflict 
discussions: Concurrent and across-time prediction 
from youths’ 
dispositions and parenting. Monographs of the Society for 
Research in Child Development, 73, (Serial No. 290, No. 2), 1-160. 

El-Dib, M., Massaro, A. N., Glass, P., & Aly, H. (2012). Neurobehavioral 
assessment as a predictor of neurodevelopmental outcome in 
preterm infants. Journal of Perinatology, 32, 299-303. 

Eliot, L. (1999). 
What’s going on in there? 
New York: Bantam. 
Erikson, E. (1982). 
The life cycle completed. NY: Norton & 
Company. 

Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language universals: 
Language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32(5), 429–448. 

Farroni, T., Johnson, M.H. Menon, E., Zulian, L. Faraguna, D., Csibra, 


G. (2005). Newborns’ preference for face-relevant stimuli: Effects 
of contrast polarity. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 102(47), 17245-17250. 

Fergusson, D. M., & Woodward, L. J. (1999). Breastfeeding and later 
psychosocial adjustment. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 
13, 144-157. 

Fitzpatrick, E.M., Crawford, L., Ni, A., & Durieux-Smith, A. (2011). A 
descriptive analysis of language and speech skills in 4-to- 5-yr-
old children with hearing loss. Ear and Hearing, 32(2), 605-616. 

Freud, S. (1938). An outline of psychoanalysis. London: Hogarth. 

Galler J. R., & Ramsey F. (1989). A follow-up study of the influence 
of early malnutrition on development: Behavior at home and at 
school. American Academy of Child and Adolescence Psychiatry, 
28 (2), 254-61. 

Galler, J. R., Ramsey, F. C., Morely, D. S., Archer, E., & Salt, P. (1990). 
The long-term effects of early kwashiorkor compared with 
marasmus. IV. Performance on the national high school entrance 
examination. Pediatric Research, 28(3), 235- 239. 

Galler, J. R., Ramsey, F. C., Salt, P. & Archer, E. (1987). The long-
term effect of early kwashiorkor compared with marasmus. III. 
Fine motor skills. 
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology Nutrition, 
6, 855-859. 


Giedd, J. N. (2015). The amazing teen brain. Scientific American, 
312(6), 32-37. 


Giles, A., & 
Rovee-Collier, C. (2011). Infant long-term memory for 
associations formed during mere exposure. 
Infant Behavior and 
Development, 34 (2), 
327-338. 

Gillath, O., Shaver, P. R., Baek, J. M., & Chun, D. S. (2008). Genetic 
correlates of adult attachment style. Personality & Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1396–1405. 

Gleitman, L. R., & Newport, E. L. (1995). The invention of language 
by children: Environmental and biological influences on the 
acquisition of language. An Invitation to Cognitive Science, 1, 1-24. 

Goldin-


Meadow, 
S., 
& 
Mylander, 
C. 
(1998). 
Spontaneous 
sign 
systems 
created 
by 
deaf 
children 
in 
two 
cultures. 
Nature, 391(6664), 
279–281. 

Grosse, G., Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Infants 
communicate in order to be understood. Developmental 
Psychology, 46(6), 1710-1722. 


Gunderson, E. P., Hurston, S. R., Ning, X., Lo, J. C., Crites, Y., Walton, 
D…. & Quesenberry, C. P. Jr. (2015). Lactation and progression 
to type 2 diabetes mellitus after gestational diabetes mellitus: 
A prospective cohort study. American Journal of Medicine, 163, 
889-898. Doi: 10.7326/m 15-0807. 

Hainline L. (1978). Developmental changes in visual scanning of face 
and nonface patterns by infants. 
Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 25, 90–115. 

Hamer, R. (2016). The visual world of infants. Scientific American, 
104, 98-101. Harlow, H. F. (1958). The nature of love. American 
Psychologist, 13, 673-685. 


Harris, Y. R. (2005). Cognitive development. In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of human development 
(pp. 276-281). New, York: 
Sage Publications. 


Hart, S., & Carrington, H. (2002). Jealousy in 6-month-old 
infants. 
Infancy, 
3(3), 395-402. 

Hatch, E. M. (1983). Psycholinguistics: A second language 
perspective. Rowley, MA: Newbury House Publishers. Hertenstein, 
M. J., & Campos, J. J. (2004). The retention effects of an adult’s 
emotional displays on infant behavior. Child 
Development, 75(2), 
595–613. 


Holland, D., Chang, L., Ernst, T., Curan, M Dale, A. (2014). Structural 
growth trajectories and rates of change in the 
first 3 months of 
infant brain development. JAMA Neurology, 71(10), 1266-1274. 


Huttenlocher, P. R., & Dabholkar, A. S. (1997). Regional differences 
in synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex. The Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 387(2), 167-178. 

Hyde, J. S., Else-Quest, N. M., & Goldsmith, H. H. (2004). Children’s 
temperament and behavior problems predict their employed 
mothers’ work functioning. Child Development, 75, 580–594. 


Hyvärinen, L., Walthes, R., Jacob, N., Nottingham Chaplin, K., & 
Leonhardt, M. (2014). Current understanding of what infants see. 
Current Opthalmological Report, 2, 142-149. doi:10.1007/
s40135-014-0056-2 

Imai, M., Li, L., Haryu, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & 
Shigematsu, J. (2008). Novel noun and verb learning in Chinese, 
English, and Japanese children: Universality and language-
specificity in novel noun and verb learning. Child Development, 
79, 979-1000. 

Islami, F., Liu, Y., Jemal, A., Zhou, J., Weiderpass, E., Colditz, 
G…Weiss, M. (2015). Breastfeeding and breast cancer risk by 
receptor status – a systematic review and meta-analysis. Annals 
of Oncology, 26, 2398-2407. 

Iverson, J. M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Gesture paves the way 
for language development. Psychological science, 16(5), 367-371. 

Jarrett, C. (2015). 
Great myths of the brain. West Sussex, UK: Wiley. 

Johnson, M. H., & deHaan, M. (2015). Developmental cognitive 
neuroscience: An introduction. Chichester, West Sussex: UK, 
Wiley & Sons 

Jusczyk, P.W., Cutler, A., & Redanz, N.J. (1993). Infants’ preference 
for the predominant stress patterns of English words. Child 
Development, 64, 675–687. 

Karlson, E.W., Mandl, L.A., Hankison, S. E., & Grodstein, F. (2004). Do 
breast-feeding and other reproductive factors influence future 
risk of rheumatoid arthritis? Arthritis & Rheumatism, 50 (11), 
3458-3467. 

Kasprian, G., Langs, G., Brugger, P. C., Bittner, M., Weber, M., 
Arantes, M., & Prayer, D. (2011). The prenatal origin of hemispheric 
asymmetry: an in utero neuroimaging study. Cerebral Cortex, 21, 
1076–1083. 

Kiff, C. J., Lengua, L. J., & Zalewski, M. (2011). Nature and nurturing: 
Parenting in the context of child temperament. Clinical Child and 
Family Psychology Review, 14, 251–301. doi: 10.1007/
s10567-011-0093-4 


Klein, P. J., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1999). Long-term memory, forgetting, 
and deferred imitation in 12-month-old infants. Developmental 
Science, 2(1), 102-113. 


Klinnert, M. D., Campos, J. J., & Sorce, J. F. (1983). Emotions as 
behavior regulators: Social referencing in infancy. In R. Plutchik 
& H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research, and experience 
(pp. 57–86). New York, NY: Academic Press. 

Kolb, B., & 
Fantie, B. (1989). Development of the child’s brain and 
behavior. In C. R. Reynolds & E. Fletcher-Janzen (Eds.), 

Handbook of clinical child neuropsychology (pp. 17–39). New York, 
NY: Plenum Press. 

Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I. Q. (2011). An introduction to brain and 
behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Worth Publishers. 

Kopp, C. B. (2011). Development in the early years: Socialization, 
motor development, and consciousness. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 62, 165-187. 

Latham, M. C. (1997). Human nutrition in the developing world. 
Rome, IT: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. 

Lavelli, M., & Fogel, A. (2005). Developmental changes in the 
relationships between infant attention and emotion during early 
face-to-face communications: The 2 month transition. 
Developmental Psychology, 41, 265-280. 

Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. New York, 
NY: John Wiley & Sons. 

LeVine, R. A., Dixon, S., LeVine, S., Richman, A., Leiderman, P. H., 
Keefer, C. H., & Brazelton, T. B. (1994). Child care and culture: 
Lessons from Africa. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Lewis, M., & Brooks, J. (1978). Self-knowledge and emotional 
development. In M. Lewis & L. A. Rosenblum (Eds.), Genesis of 
behavior (Vol. 1, pp. 205-226). New York: Plenum Press. 

Lewis, T. L., Maurer, D., & Milewski, A. (1979). The development of 
nasal detection in young infants. Investigative Ophthalmology and 
Visual Science Supplement, 19, 271. 

Li, Y., & Ding, Y. (2017). Human visual development. In Y. Liu., & 


W. Chen (Eds.), Pediatric lens diseases (pp. 11-20). 
Singapore: 
Springer. 


Los 
Angles 
County Department of Public Health. 
(2019). 
Breastfeeding vs. formula feeding. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://publichealth.lacounty.gov/LAmoms/lessons/
Breastfeeding/6_BreastfeedingvsFormulaFeeding.pdf 

Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for identifying infants 
as disorganized/disoriented during the Ainsworth Strange 
Situation. In M. T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings 
(Eds.), Attachment inthe Preschool Years (pp.121– 160).Chicago,IL: 
UniversityofChicagoPress. 

Mandel, D. R., Jusczyk, P. W., & Pisoni, D. B. (1995). Infants’ 
recognition of the sound patterns of their own names. 
Psychological Science, 6(5), 314–317. 


Mayberry, R. I., Lock, E., & Kazmi, H. (2002). Development: Linguistic 
ability and early language exposure. Nature, 417(6884), 38. 

Moeller, M.P., & Tomblin, J.B. (2015). An introduction to the 
outcomes of children with hearing loss study. Ear and Hearing, 36 
Suppl (0-1), 4S-13S 

Morelli, G., Rogoff, B., Oppenheim, D., & Goldsmith, D. (1992). 
Cultural variations in infants’ sleeping arrangements: Questions of 
independence. 
Developmental Psychology, 28, 
604-613. 

Nelson, E. A., 
Schiefenhoevel, W., & 
Haimerl, F. (2000). Child care 
practices in 
nonindustrialized 
societies. Pediatrics, 105, e75. 

O’Connor, T. G., Marvin, R. S., Rotter, M., Olrich, J. T., Britner, P. 
A., & The English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team. 
(2003). 
Child-parent attachment following early institutional deprivation. 
Development and Psychopathology, 15, 19- 38. 


Papousek, M. (2007). Communication in early infancy: An arena of 
intersubjective learning. Infant Behavior and Development, 30, 
258-266. 

Pearson Education. (2016). 
Bayley Scales of Infant Development, 
Third Edition. New York: Pearson. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.pearsonclinical.com/childhood/products/


100000123/bayley-scales-of-infant-and-toddler-
development- 
third-edition-bayley-iii.html#tab-details 

Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and brain mechanisms. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Petitto, L. A., & Marentette, P. F. (1991). Babbling in the manual 
mode: Evidence for the ontogeny of language. Science, 251(5000), 
1493–1496. 

Phelps, B. J. (2005). Habituation. In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), Encyclopedia 
of human development (pp. 597-600). New York: Sage 
Publications. 

Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child. New York: 
Basic Books. 

Pickens, J., Field, T., Nawrocki, T., Martinez, A., Soutullo, D., & 
Gonzalez, J. (1994). Full-term and preterm infants’ perception of 
face-voice synchrony. Infant Behavior and Development, 17(4), 
447-455. 

Porter, R. H., Makin, J. W., Davis, L. M., Christensen, K. (1992). 
Responsiveness of infants to olfactory cues from lactating 
females. Infant Behavior and Development, 15, 85-93. 

Redondo, C. M., Gago-Dominguez, M., Ponte, S. M., Castelo, M. 
E., 
Jiang, X., 
Garcia, A.A… 
Castelao, J. E. (2012). Breast feeding, 
parity and breast cancer subtypes in a Spanish cohort. 
PLoS 
One, 
7(7): e40543 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.00040543 

Richardson, B. D. (1980). Malnutrition and nutritional 
anthropometry. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics, 26(3), 80-84. 
Rothbart, M. K., & Bates, J. E. (2006). Temperament. In N. 
Eisenberg (Ed.). Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3: 
Social, 
emotional, and personality development 
(6th 
ed., pp. 
99-116). 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 


Rothbart, M. K., Posner, M. I. & Kieras, J. (2006). Temperament, 
attention, and the development of self-regulation. In M. 
McCartney & D. Phillips (Eds.) Blackwell handbook of early 
childhood development (pp. 3338-357). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 

Rothbaum, F., Weisz, J., Pott, M., Miyake, K., & Morelli, G. 


(2010). 
Attachment and culture: Security in the United States and 
Japan. 
American Psychologist, 55, 1093-1104. 

Rovee-Collier, C. (1987). Learning and memory in infancy. In J. D. 
Osofsky (Ed.), Handbook of infant development, (2nd, ed., 
pp. 
98-148). New York: Wiley. 


Rovee-Collier, C. (1990). The “memory system” of prelinguistic 
infants. Annuals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 608, 
517-542. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-66231990.tb48908. 


Rovee-Collier, C., & Hayne, H. (1987). Reactivation of infant memory: 
Implications for cognitive development. In H. W. Reese (Ed.), 
Advances in child development and behavior. (Vol. 20, pp. 
185-238). London, UK: Academic Press. 

Rymer, R. (1993). Genie: A scientific tragedy. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 

Salkind, N. J. (2005). 
Encyclopedia of human development. New 
York: Sage Publications. 

Schwarz, E. B., Brown, J. S., Creasman, J. M. Stuebe, A., McClure, 
C. K., Van Den Eeden, S. K., & Thom, D. (2010). Lactation and 
maternal risk of type-2 diabetes: A population-based study. 
American Journal of Medicine, 123, 863.e1-863.e6. doi: 10.1016/
j.amjmed.2010.03.016. 


Seifer, R., Schiller, M., Sameroff, A., Resnick, S., & Riordan, K. (1996). 
Attachment, maternal sensitivity, and infant temperament during 
the first year of life. Developmental Psychology, 32, 12-25. 

Sen, M. G., Yonas, A., & Knill, D. C. (2001). Development of infants’ 
sensitivity to surface contour information for spatial layout. 
Perception, 30, 167-176. 

Senghas, R. J., Senghas, A., & Pyers, J. E. (2005). The emergence 
of Nicaraguan Sign Language: Questions of development, 
acquisition, and evolution. In S. T. Parker, J. Langer, & C. Milbrath 
(Eds.), Biology and knowledge revisited: From neurogenesis to 
psychogenesis (pp. 287–306). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 

Shaffer, D. R. (1985). 
Developmental psychology: Theory, research, 


and applications. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, Inc. Skinner, B. F. 
(1953). 
Science and human behavior. 
NY: Free Press. 

Sorce, J. F., Emde, J. J., Campos, J. J., & Klinnert, M. D. (1985). Maternal 
emotional signaling: Its effect on the visual cliff behavior of 
1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 21, 195–200. 

Spelke, E. S., & Cortelyou, A. (1981). Perceptual aspects of social 
knowing: Looking and listening in infancy. Infant social cognition, 
61-84. 

Springer, S. P. & Deutsch, G. (1993). 
Left brain, right brain 
(4th 
ed.). 
New York: W. H. Freeman. 

Stika, C.J., Eisenberg, L.S., Johnson, K.C. Henning, S.C., Colson, B.G., 
Ganguly, D.H., & DesJardin, J.L. (2015). Developmental outcomes 
of early-identified children who are hard of hearing at 12 to 18 
months of age. Early Human Development, 9(1), 47-55. 


Stork, F. & Widdowson, J. (1974). Learning about Linguistics. London: 
Hutchinson. 

Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child development. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 

Thompson, R. A. (2006). The development of the person. In W. 
Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.), 
Handbook of child psychology 
(6th 
Ed.). 
New York: Wiley. 

Thompson, R. A., & Goodvin, R. (2007). Taming the tempest in the 
teapot. In C. A. Brownell & C. B. Kopp (Eds.). Socioemotional 
development in the toddler years: Transitions and 
transformations (pp. 320-342). New York: Guilford. 


Thompson, R. A., Winer, A. C., & Goodvin, R. (2010). The individual 
child: Temperament, emotion, self, and personality. In M. 
Bornstein & M. E. Lamb (Eds.), Developmental science: An 
advanced textbook (6th ed., pp. 423–464). New York, NY: 
Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis. 

Titus-Ernstoff, L., Rees, J. R., Terry, K. L., & Cramer, D. W. (2010). 
Breast-feeding the last-born child and risk of ovarian cancer. 
Cancer Causes Control, 21(2), 201-207. doi: 10.1007/
s10552-009-9450-8 


Tomblin, J. B., Harrison, M., Ambrose, S. E., Walker, E. A., Oleson, J. 
J., & Moeller, M. P. (2015). Language outcomes in young children 
with mild to severe hearing loss. Ear and hearing, 36 Suppl 1(0 1), 
76S–91S. 

United Nations Children’s Fund. (2015). Levels and trends in child 
mortality: Report 2015. United Nations Children’s Fund. 
New York: 
NY. 


United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of 
Women’s Health. (2011). Your guide to breast feeding. 
Washington 
D.C. 


United States National Library of Medicine. 
(2016). 
Circumcision. 
Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/
circumcision.html 

Van den Boom, D. C. (1994). The influence of temperament and 
mothering on attachment and exploration: An experimental 
manipulation of sensitive responsiveness among lower-class 
mothers with irritable infants. Child Development, 65, 1457–1477. 

Van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & Sagi, A. (1999). Cross-cultural patterns 
of attachment. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of 
attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 
713-734). New York: Guilford. 

Webb, S. J., Monk, C. S., & Nelson, C. A. (2001). Mechanisms of 
postnatal neurobiological development: Implications for human 
development. Developmental Neuropsychology, 19, 147-171. 

Weekes-Shackelford, V. A. & Shackelford, T. K. (2005). Sudden Infant 
Death Syndrome (SIDS). In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of 
human development (pp. 1238-1239). New York: Sage 
Publications. 


Werker, J. F., Pegg, J. E., & McLeod, P. J. (1994). A cross-language 
investigation of infant preference for infant-directed 
communication. Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 323-333. 

Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (2002). Cross-language speech 
perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganization during the 
first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development, 25, 121-133. 


Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 3 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 

 



Chapter 12: Psychosocial 
Development in Infancy & 
Toddlerhood 

Chapter 12 Learning Objectives 

Identify styles of temperament and explore 
goodness-of-fit 
Describe the infant emotions, self-awareness, 
stranger wariness, and separation anxiety 
Describe the early theories of attachment 
Contrast styles of attachment according to the 
Strange Situation Technique 
Explain the factors that influence attachment 
Use Erikson’s theory to characterize psychosocial 
development during infancy 


Temperament 

Perhaps you have spent time with a number of infants. How were 
they alike? How did they differ? How do you compare with your 
siblings or other children you have known well? You may have 


noticed that some seemed to be in a better mood than others and 
that some were more sensitive to noise or more easily distracted 
than others. These differences may be attributed to temperament. 
Temperament is the innate characteristics of the infant, including 
mood, activity level, and emotional reactivity, noticeable soon after 
birth. 

In a 1956 landmark study, Chess and Thomas (1996) evaluated 141 
children’s temperament based on parental interviews. Referred to 
as the New York Longitudinal Study, infants were assessed on 9 
dimensions of temperament including: Activity level, rhythmicity 
(regularity of biological functions), approach/withdrawal (how 
children deal with new things), adaptability to situations, intensity 
of reactions, threshold of responsiveness (how intense a stimulus 
has to be for the child to react), quality of mood, distractibility, 
attention span, and persistence. Based on the infants’ behavioral 
profiles, they were categorized into three general types of 
temperament: 

Easy Child 
(40%) who is able to quickly adapt to routine and 
new situations, remains calm, is easy to soothe, and usually is 
in a positive 
mood. 
Difficult Child (10%) who reacts negatively to new situations, 
has trouble adapting to routine, is usually negative in mood, 
and cries frequently. 
Slow-to-Warm-Up Child 
(15%) has a low activity level, adjusts 
slowly to 
new situations and is often negative in 
mood. 


As can be seen the percentages do not equal 100% as some children 
were not able to be placed neatly into one of the categories. Think 
about how you might approach each type of child in order to 
improve your interactions with them. An easy child will not need 
much extra attention, while a slow to warm up child may need to be 
given advance warning if new people or situations are going to be 
introduced. A difficult child may need to be given extra time to burn 
off their energy. A caregiver’s ability to work well and accurately 


read the child will enjoy a goodness-of-fit, meaning their styles 
match and communication and interaction can flow. Parents who 
recognize each child’s temperament and accept it, will nurture more 
effective interactions with the child and encourage more adaptive 
functioning. For example, an adventurous child whose parents 
regularly take her outside on hikes would provide a good “fit” to her 
temperament. 


Parenting is bidirectional: Not only do parents affect their children, 
children influence their parents. Child characteristics, such as 
temperament, affect parenting behaviors and roles. For example, an 
infant with an easy temperament may enable parents to feel more 
effective, as they are easily able to soothe the child and elicit smiling 
and cooing. On the other hand, a cranky or fussy infant elicits fewer 
positive reactions from his or her parents and may result in parents 
feeling less effective in the parenting role (Eisenberg et al., 2008). 
Over time, parents of more difficult children may become more 
punitive and less patient with their 
children (Clark, Kochanska, & 
Ready, 2000; Eisenberg et al., 1999; Kiff, Lengua, & Zalewski, 2011). 
Parents who have a fussy, difficult child are less satisfied with their 
marriages and have greater challenges in balancing work and family 
roles (Hyde, Else-Quest, & Goldsmith, 2004). Thus, child 
temperament is one of the child characteristics that influence how 
parents behave with their children. 



Temperament does not change dramatically as we grow up, but 
we may learn how to work around and manage our temperamental 
qualities. Temperament may be one of the things about us that 
stays the same throughout development. In contrast, personality, 
defined as an individual’s consistent pattern of feeling, thinking, 
and behaving, is the result of the continuous interplay between 
biological disposition and experience. 


Personality also develops from temperament in other ways 
(Thompson, Winer, & Goodvin, 2010). As children mature 
biologically, temperamental characteristics emerge and change 
over time. A newborn is not capable of much self-control, but as 
brain-based capacities for self- control advance, temperamental 
changes in self-regulation become more apparent. For example, a 
newborn who cries frequently does not necessarily have a grumpy 
personality; over time, with sufficient parental support and an 
increased sense of security, the child might be less likely to cry. 

In addition, personality is made up of many other features besides 
temperament. Children’s developing self-concept, their motivations 
to achieve or to socialize, their values and goals, their coping styles, 


their sense of responsibility and conscientiousness, and many other 
qualities are encompassed into personality. These qualities are 
influenced by biological dispositions, but even more by the child’s 
experiences with others, particularly in close relationships, that 
guide the growth of individual characteristics. Indeed, personality 
development begins with the biological foundations of 
temperament but becomes increasingly elaborated, extended, and 
refined over time. The newborn that parents gazed upon becomes 
an adult with a personality of depth and nuance. 


Infant Emotions 

At birth, infants exhibit two emotional responses: Attraction and 
withdrawal. They show attraction to pleasant situations that bring 
comfort, stimulation, and pleasure, and they withdraw from 
unpleasant stimulation such as bitter flavors or physical discomfort. 
At around two months, infants exhibit social engagement in the 
form of social smiling as they respond with smiles to those who 
engage their positive attention (Lavelli & Fogel, 2005). 


Social smiling becomes more stable and organized as infants learn 
to use their smiles to engage their parents in interactions. Pleasure 
is expressed as laughter at 3 to 5 months of age, and displeasure 
becomes more specific as fear, sadness, or anger between ages 6 
and 8 months. Anger is often the reaction to being prevented from 
obtaining a goal, such as a toy being removed (Braungart-Rieker, 
Hill-Soderlund, & Karrass, 2010). In contrast, sadness is typically 
the response when infants are deprived of a caregiver (Papousek, 
2007). Fear is often associated with the presence of a stranger, 
known as stranger wariness, or the departure of significant others 
known as separation anxiety. 
Both appear sometime between 6 and 
15 months after object permanence has been acquired. Further, 
there is some indication that infants may experience jealousy as 
young as 6 months of age (Hart & Carrington, 2002). 


Emotions are often divided into two general categories: Basic 
emotions, such as interest, happiness, anger, fear, surprise, sadness 
and disgust, which appear first, and self-conscious emotions, such 
as envy, pride, shame, guilt, doubt, and embarrassment. Unlike 
primary emotions, secondary emotions appear as children start to 
develop a self-concept and require social instruction on when to 
feel such emotions. The situations in which children learn self- 
conscious emotions vary from culture to culture. Individualistic 
cultures teach us to feel pride in personal accomplishments, while 
in more collective cultures children are taught to not call attention 
to themselves unless you wish to feel embarrassed for doing so 
(Akimoto & Sanbinmatsu, 1999). 

Facial expressions of emotion are important regulators of social 
interaction. In the developmental literature, this has been 
investigated under the concept of social referencing; that is, the 
process whereby infants seek out information from others to clarify 
a situation and then use that information to act (Klinnert, Campos, 
& Sorce, 1983). To date, the strongest demonstration of social 
referencing comes from work on the visual cliff. In the first study to 
investigate this concept, Sorce, Emde, Campos, and Klinnert (1985) 
placed mothers on the far end of the “cliff” from the infant. Mothers 
first smiled to the infants and placed a toy on top of the safety glass 
to attract them; infants invariably began crawling to their mothers. 
When the infants were in the center of the table, however, the 
mother then posed an expression of fear, sadness, anger, interest, 
or joy. The results were clearly different for the different faces; no 
infant crossed the table when the mother showed fear; only 6% did 
when the mother posed anger, 33% crossed when the mother posed 
sadness, and approximately 75% of the infants crossed when the 
mother posed joy or interest. 


Other studies provide similar support for facial expressions as 
regulators of social interaction. Experimenters posed facial 
expressions of neutral, anger, or disgust toward babies as they 
moved toward an object and measured the amount of inhibition 


the babies showed in touching the object (Bradshaw, 1986). The 
results for 10- and 15-month olds were the same: Anger produced 
the greatest inhibition, followed by disgust, with neutral the least. 
This study was later replicated using joy and disgust expressions, 
altering the method so that the infants were not allowed to touch 
the toy (compared with a distractor object) until one hour after 
exposure to the expression (Hertenstein & Campos, 2004). At 14 
months of age, significantly more infants touched the toy when they 
saw joyful expressions, but fewer touched the toy when the infants 
saw disgust. 

A final emotional change is in self-regulation. 
Emotional self-
regulation 
refers to strategies we use to control our emotional 
states so that we can attain goals 
(Thompson & Goodvin, 2007). 

This requires effortful control of emotions and initially requires 
assistance from caregivers (Rothbart, Posner, & Kieras, 2006). Young 
infants have very limited capacity to adjust their emotional states 
and depend on their caregivers to help soothe themselves. 
Caregivers can offer distractions to redirect the infant’s attention 
and comfort to reduce the emotional distress. As areas of the 
infant’s prefrontal cortex continue to develop, infants can tolerate 
more stimulation. By 4 to 6 months, babies can begin to shift their 
attention away from upsetting stimuli (Rothbart et al, 2006). Older 
infants and toddlers can more effectively communicate their need 
for help and can crawl or walk toward or away from various 
situations (Cole, Armstrong, & Pemberton, 2010). This aids in their 
ability to self-regulate. Temperament also plays a role in children’s 
ability to control their emotional states, and individual differences 
have been noted in the emotional self-regulation of infants and 
toddlers (Rothbart & Bates, 2006). 

Development of sense of self: 
During the second year of life, 
children begin to recognize themselves as they gain a sense of 
self as object. In a classic experiment by Lewis and Brooks (1978) 
children 9 to 24 months of age were placed in front of a mirror 


after a spot of rouge was placed on their nose as their mothers 
pretended to wipe something off the child’s face. If the child reacted 
by touching his or her own nose rather that of the “baby” in the 
mirror, it was taken to suggest that the child recognized the 
reflection as him- or herself. Lewis and 
Brooks found that 
somewhere between 15 and 24 months most infants developed a 
sense of self-awareness. 
Self-awareness 
is the realization that you 
are separate from others 
(Kopp, 
2011). 

Once a child has achieved self-awareness, the child is moving 
toward understanding social emotions such as guilt, shame or 
embarrassment, as well as, sympathy or empathy. 

Forming Attachments 

Attachment is the close bond with a caregiver from which the infant 
derives a sense of security. The formation of attachments in infancy 
has been the subject of considerable research as attachments have 


been viewed as foundations for future relationships. Additionally, 
attachments form the basis for confidence and curiosity as toddlers, 
and as important influences on self-concept. 

Freud’s Psychoanalytic Theory: According to Freud (1938) infants 
are oral creatures who obtain pleasure from sucking and mouthing 
objects. 
Freud believed the infant will become attached to a person 
or object that provides this pleasure. Consequently, infants were 
believed to become attached to their mother because she was the 
one who satisfied their oral needs and provided pleasure. Freud 
further believed that the infants will become attached to their 
mothers “if the mother is relaxed and generous in her feeding 
practices, thereby allowing the child a lot of oral pleasure,” (Shaffer, 
1985, p. 435). Was Freud correct in his explanation for why infants 
became attached? 


Harlow’s Research: In one classic study showing if nursing was 
the most important factor to attachment, Wisconsin University 
psychologists Harry and Margaret Harlow investigated the 
responses of young monkeys. The infants were separated from their 
biological mothers, and two surrogate mothers were introduced to 
their cages. One, the wire mother, consisted of a round wooden 


head, a mesh of cold metal wires, and a bottle of milk from which 
the baby monkey could drink. The second mother was a foam-
rubber form wrapped in a heated terry-cloth blanket. The infant 
monkeys went to the wire mother for food, but they overwhelmingly 
preferred and spent significantly more time with the warm terry-
cloth mother. The warm terry-cloth mother provided no food but 
did provide comfort (Harlow, 1958). 
The infant’s need for physical 
closeness and touching is referred to as 
contact comfort. Contact 
comfort is believed to be the foundation for attachment. 
The 
Harlows’ studies confirmed that babies have social as well as 
physical needs. Both monkeys and human babies need a secure base 
that allows them to feel safe. From this base, they can gain the 
confidence they need to venture out and explore their worlds. 

Bowlby’s Theory: Building on the work of Harlow and others, John 
Bowlby developed the concept of attachment theory. He defined 
attachment as the affectional bond or tie that an infant forms with 
the mother (Bowlby, 1969). An infant must form this bond with a 
primary caregiver in order to have normal social and emotional 
development. In addition, Bowlby proposed that this attachment 
bond is very powerful and continues throughout life. He used the 
concept of a secure base to define a healthy attachment between 
parent and child (Bowlby, 1982). A secure base is a parental presence 
that gives the child a sense of safety as the child explores the 
surroundings. 


Bowlby said that two things are needed for a healthy attachment: 
The caregiver must be responsive to the child’s physical, social, 
and emotional needs; and the caregiver and child must engage in 
mutually enjoyable interactions (Bowlby, 1969). Additionally, Bowlby 
observed that 
infants would go to extraordinary lengths to prevent 
separation from their parents, such as crying, refusing to be 
comforted, and waiting for the caregiver to return. He observed that 
these same expressions were common to many other mammals, and 
consequently argued that these negative responses to separation 
serve an evolutionary 
function. 

Because mammalian infants cannot feed or protect themselves, they 
are dependent upon the care and protection of adults for survival. 
Thus, those infants who were able to maintain proximity to an 
attachment figure we’re more likely to survive and reproduce. 


Erikson: Trust vs. Mistrust 

As previously discussed in chapter 1, Erikson formulated an eight 
stage theory of psychosocial development. Erikson was in 
agreement on the importance of a secure base, arguing that the 
most important goal of infancy was the development of a basic 
sense of trust in one’s caregivers. Consequently, the first stage, 
trust vs. mistrust, highlights the importance of attachment. Erikson 
maintained that the first year to year and a half of life involves 
the establishment of a sense of trust (Erikson, 1982). Infants are 
dependent and must rely on others to meet their basic physical 
needs as well as their needs for stimulation and comfort. A caregiver 
who consistently meets these needs instills a sense of trust or the 
belief that the world is a trustworthy place. The caregiver should 
not worry about over indulging a child’s need for comfort, contact 
or stimulation. 

Problems establishing trust: Erikson (1982) believed that mistrust 
could contaminate all aspects of one’s life and deprive the individual 
of love and fellowship with others. Consider the implications for 
establishing trust if a caregiver is unavailable or is upset and ill-
prepared to care for a child. Or if a child is born prematurely, 
is unwanted, or has physical problems that make him or her less 
desirable to a parent. Under these circumstances, we cannot 
assume that the parent is going to provide the child with a feeling of 
trust. 

Mary Ainsworth and the Strange Situation 
Technique 

Developmental psychologist Mary Ainsworth, a student of John 
Bowlby, continued studying the development of attachment in 
infants. Ainsworth and her colleagues created a laboratory test that 


measured an infant’s attachment to his or her parent. The test is 
called 
The Strange Situation Technique 
because it is 
conducted in 
a context that is unfamiliar to the child and therefore likely to 
heighten the child’s need for his or her parent 
(Ainsworth, 1979). 

During the procedure, that lasts about 20 minutes, the parent and 
the infant are first left alone, while the infant explores the room 
full of toys. Then a strange adult enters the room and talks for 
a minute to the parent, after which the parent leaves the room. 
The stranger stays with the infant for a few minutes, and then the 
parent again enters, and the stranger leaves the room. During the 
entire session, a video camera records the child’s behaviors, which 
are later coded by trained coders. The investigators were especially 
interested in how the child responded to the caregiver leaving and 
returning to the room, referred to as the “reunion.” On the basis 
of their behaviors, the children are categorized into one of four 
groups where each group reflects a different kind of attachment 
relationship with the caregiver. One style is secure and the other 
three styles are referred to as insecure. 

A child with a 
secure attachment style 
usually explores freely 
while the caregiver is present and may engage with the 
stranger. The child will typically play with the toys and bring 
one to the caregiver to show and describe from time to time. 
The child may be 
upset when the caregiver departs but is also 
happy to see the caregiver 
return. 


A child with an 
ambivalent 
(sometimes called 
resistant) 
attachment style 
is wary about the situation in 
general, particularly the stranger, and stays close or even 
clings to the caregiver rather than exploring the toys. When 
the caregiver leaves, the child is 
extremely distressed and is 
ambivalent when the caregiver returns. The child may rush to 
the caregiver, but then fails to be comforted when picked up. 
The child may still be angry and even resist attempts to 
be 
soothed. 



A child with an 
avoidant attachment style 
will avoid or ignore 
the mother, showing little emotion when the mother departs 
or returns. The child may run away from the 
mother 
when 
she 
approaches. 
The 
child 
will 
not 
explore 
very 
much, 
regardless 
of 
who 
is there, and the stranger will not be 
treated much differently from the 
mother. 


A 
child 
with 
a 
disorganized/
disoriented 
attachment 
style 
seems 
to 
have 
an 
inconsistent 
way of coping with the stress of the strange situation. The 
child may cry during the separation, but avoid the mother 
when she returns, or the child may approach the mother but 
then freeze or fall to the 
floor. 


How common are the attachment styles among children in the 
United States? It is estimated that about 65 percent of children 
in the United States are securely attached. Twenty percent exhibit 
avoidant styles and 10 to 15 percent are ambivalent. Another 5 to 
10 percent may be characterized as disorganized (Ainsworth, 
Blehar, 
Waters, & Wall, 1978). 

Some cultural differences in attachment styles have been found 
(Rothbaum, Weisz, Pott, Miyake, & Morelli, 2010). For example, 
German parents value independence and Japanese mothers are 
typically by their children’s sides. As a result, the rate of insecure-
avoidant attachments is higher in Germany and insecure-resistant 
attachments are higher in Japan. These differences reflect cultural 
variation rather than true insecurity, however (van Ijzendoorn and 
Sagi, 1999). Overall, secure attachment is the most common type 
of attachment seen in every culture studied thus far (Thompson, 
2006). 


Caregiver Interactions and the Formation of Attachment: Most 
developmental psychologists argue that a child becomes securely 
attached when there is consistent contact from one or more 
caregivers who meet the physical and emotional needs of the child 
in a responsive and appropriate manner. However, even in cultures 
where mothers do not talk, cuddle, and play with their infants, 
secure attachments can develop (LeVine et. al., 1994). 

The insecure ambivalent style occurs when the parent is insensitive 
and responds inconsistently to the child’s needs. Consequently, the 
infant is never sure that the world is a trustworthy place or that 
he or she can rely on others without some anxiety. A caregiver 
who is unavailable, perhaps because of marital tension, substance 
abuse, or preoccupation with work, may send a message to the 
infant he or she cannot rely on having needs met. An infant who 
receives only sporadic attention when experiencing discomfort may 
not learn how to calm down. The child may cry if separated from 
the caregiver and also cry upon their return. They seek constant 
reassurance that never seems to satisfy their doubt. Keep in mind 
that clingy behavior can also just be part of a child’s natural 


disposition or temperament and does not necessarily reflect some 
kind of parental neglect. Additionally, a caregiver that attends to a 
child’s frustration can help teach them to be calm and to relax. 

The insecure-avoidant style is marked by insecurity, but this style is 
also characterized by a tendency to avoid contact with the caregiver 
and with others. This child may have learned that needs typically 
go unmet and learns that the caregiver does not provide care and 
cannot be relied upon for comfort, even sporadically. An insecure-
avoidant child learns to be more independent and disengaged. 

The 
insecure disorganized/disoriented style 
represents the most 
insecure style of attachment and occurs when the child is given 
mixed, confused, and inappropriate responses from the caregiver. 
For example, a mother who suffers from schizophrenia may laugh 
when a child is hurting or cry when a child exhibits joy. The child 
does not learn how to interpret emotions or to connect with the 
unpredictable caregiver. This type of attachment is also often seen 
in children who have been abused. Research has shown that abuse 
disrupts a child’s ability to regulate their emotions (Main & Solomon, 
1990). 

Caregiver Consistency: Having a consistent caregiver may be 
jeopardized if the infant is cared for in a day care setting with a 
high turn-over of staff or if institutionalized and given little more 
than basic physical care. Infants who, perhaps because of being in 
orphanages with inadequate care, have not had the opportunity to 
attach in infancy may still form initial secure attachments several 
years later. However, they may have more emotional problems of 
depression, anger, or be overly friendly as they interact with others 
(O’Connor et. al., 2003). 


Social Deprivation: Severe deprivation of parental attachment can 
lead to serious problems. According to studies of children who have 
not been given warm, nurturing care, they may show developmental 
delays, failure to thrive, and attachment disorders (Bowlby, 1982). 
Non-organic failure to thrive is the diagnosis for an infant who 
does not grow, develop, or gain weight on schedule and there is 
no known medical explanation for this failure. Poverty, neglect, 
inconsistent parenting, and severe family dysfunction are correlated 
with non-organic failure to thrive. In addition, postpartum 
depression can cause even a well-intentioned mother to neglect her 
infant. 

Reactive Attachment Disorder: Children who experience social 
neglect or deprivation, repeatedly change primary caregivers that 
limit opportunities to form stable attachments or are reared in 
unusual settings (such as institutions) that limit opportunities to 
form stable attachments can certainly have difficulty forming 
attachments. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (American Psychiatric Association, 
2013), those children experiencing neglectful situations and also 
displaying markedly disturbed and developmentally inappropriate 


attachment behavior, such as being inhibited and withdrawn, 
minimal social and emotional responsiveness to others, and limited 
positive affect, may be diagnosed with reactive attachment disorder. 
This disorder often occurs with developmental delays, especially in 
cognitive and language areas. Fortunately, the majority of severely 
neglected children do not develop reactive attachment disorder, 
which occurs in less than 10% of such children. The quality of the 
caregiving environment after serious neglect affects the 
development of this disorder. 

Resiliency: Being able to overcome challenges and successfully 
adapt is resiliency. Even young children can exhibit strong resiliency 
to harsh circumstances. Resiliency can be attributed to certain 
personality factors, such as an easy-going temperament. Some 
children are warm, friendly, and responsive, whereas others tend 
to be more irritable, less manageable, and difficult to console, and 
these differences play a role in attachment (Gillath, Shaver, Baek, & 
Chun, 2008; Seifer, Schiller, Sameroff, Resnick, & Riordan, 1996). It 
seems safe to say that attachment, like most other developmental 
processes, is affected by an interplay of genetic and socialization 
influences. 


Receiving support from others also leads to resiliency. A positive 
and strong support group can help a parent and child build a strong 
foundation by offering assistance and positive attitudes toward the 
newborn and parent. In a direct test of this idea, Dutch researcher 
van den Boom (1994) randomly assigned some babies’ mothers to 
a training session in which they learned to better respond to their 
children’s needs. The research found that these mothers’ babies 
were more likely to show a secure attachment style in comparison 
to the mothers in a control group that did not receive training. 


Erikson: Autonomy vs. Shame and Doubt 

As the child begins to walk and talk, an interest in independence or 
autonomy replaces a concern for trust. The toddler tests the limits 
of what can be touched, said, and explored. Erikson (1982) believed 
that toddlers should be allowed to explore their environment as 
freely as safety allows and in so doing will develop a sense of 
independence that will later grow to self-esteem, initiative, and 
overall confidence. If a caregiver is overly anxious about the 
toddler’s actions for fear that the child will get hurt or violate other’s 
expectations, the caregiver can give the child the message that he or 
she should be ashamed of their behavior and instill a sense of doubt 
in their own abilities. Parenting advice based on these ideas would 
be to keep toddlers safe but let them learn by doing. 

Measuring Infant Development 

The Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, Third Edition 
(Bayley-III) comprehensively assess children within the age range 
of 1 to 42 months (Pearson Education, 2016). Children are evaluated 
in five key developmental domains, including cognition, language, 
social-emotional, motor, and adaptive behavior. By identifying 
developmental delays in the very young, the Bayley Scales can 
highlight which early intervention techniques might be most 
beneficial. Detailed information is even able to be obtained from 
non-verbal children. 

 


References 

Ainsworth, M. (1979). Infant-mother attachment. American 
Psychologist, 34(10), 932-937. 


Ainsworth, M., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of 
attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Akimoto, S. A., & Sanbinmatsu, D. M. (1999). Differences in self-
effacing behavior between European and Japanese Americans: 
Effect on competence evaluations. Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology, 30, 159-177. 

American Optometric Association. (2019). 
Infant vision: Birth to 24 
months of age. Retrieved from 
https://www.aoa.org/patients-
and-public/good-vision-throughout-life/childrens-vision/
infant-vision-birth-to-24- 
months-of-age 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). 
Diagnostic 
and 
statistical 
manual of 
mental 
disorders, 5th 
edition (DSM-5). 

Washington, DC: Author. 

Anglin, J. M. (1993). Vocabulary development: A morphological 
analysis. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child 
Development, 58 10), v–165. 

Aslin, R. N. (1981). Development of smooth pursuit in human infants. 
In D. F. Fisher, R. A. Monty, & J. W. Senders (Eds.), Eye movements: 
Cognition and visual perception (pp. 31– 51). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 

Atkinson, J., & Braddick, O. (2003). Neurobiological models of normal 
and abnormal visual development. In M. de Haan & M. H. Johnson 
(Eds.), 
The cognitive neuroscience of development 
(pp. 43– 71). 
Hove: Psychology Press. 

Baillargeon, R. (1987. Object permanence in 3 ½ and 4 ½ year-old 
infants. Developmental Psychology, 22, 655-664. Baillargeon, R., 
Li, J., Gertner, Y, & Wu, D. (2011). How do infants reason about 
physical events? In U. Goswami (Ed.), The 
Wiley-Blackwell 
handbook of childhood cognitive development. MA: John Wiley. 


Balaban, M. T. & Reisenauer, C. D. (2013). Sensory development. 
In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), Encyclopedia of human development 
(pp. 
1144-1147). New, York: Sage Publications. 


Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Early referential understanding: Infants’ ability 
to recognize referential acts for what they are. Developmental 
Psychology, 29(5), 832–843. 



Bandura, A. (1977). 
Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 

Bartrip J, Morton J, & De Schonen S. (2001). Responses to mother’s 
face in 3-week to 5-month-old infants. British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology, 19, 219–232 

Berk, L. E. (2007). 
Development through the life span 
(4th ed.). 
Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Berne, S. A. (2006). The primitive reflexes: Considerations in the 
infant. Optometry & Vision Development, 37(3), 139-145. Bloem, 
M. (2007). The 2006 WHO child growth standards. BMJ 
: British 
Medical Journal, 334(7596), 705–706. 
http://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.39155.658843.BE 


Blossom, M., & Morgan, J. L. (2006). Does the face say what the 
mouth says? A study of infants’ sensitivity to visual prosody. In 
the 30th annual Boston University conference on language 
development, Somerville, MA. 


Bogartz, R. S., Shinskey, J. L., & Schilling, T. (2000). Object 
permanence in five-and-a-half month old infants. Infancy, 1(4), 
403-428. 

Bowlby, J. (1969). 
Attachment and loss. 
London: Hogarth Press. 
Bowlby, J. (1982). 
Attachment 
(2nd 
ed.). New York: Basic Books. 

Bradshaw, D. (1986). Immediate and prolonged effectiveness of 
negative emotion expressions in inhibiting infants’ actions 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Berkeley, CA: University of 
California, Berkeley. 

Braungart-Rieker, J. M., Hill-Soderlund, A. L., &Karrass, J. (2010). 
Fear, anger reactivity trajectories from 4 to 16 months: The roles 
of temperament, regulation, and maternal sensitivity. 
Developmental Psychology, 46, 791-804. 

Bushnell, I. W. R. (2001) Mother’s face recognition in newborn 
infants: Learning and memory. Infant Child Development, 
10, 
67-94. 


Bushnell, I. W. R., Sai, F., Mullin, J. T. (1989). Neonatal recognition 
of mother’s face. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 7, 
3-15. 



Bruer, J. T. (1999). 
The myth of the first three years: A new 
understanding of early brain development and lifelong learning. 
New York: Simon and Schuster. 

Campanella, J., & 
Rovee-Collier, C. 
(2005). Latent learning and 
deferred imitation at 3 months. Infancy, 7(3), 
243-262. Carlson, 
N. 
(2014). Foundations of behavioral neuroscience (9th 
ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson. 

Carpenter, R., McGarvey, C., Mitchell, E. A., Tappin, D. M., 
Vennemann, M. M., Smuk, M., & Carpenter, J. R. (2013). Bed sharing 
when parents do not smoke: Is there a risk of SIDS? An individual 
level analysis of five major case–control studies. BMJ Open, 
3:e002299. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-002299 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018). 
Breastfeeding 
facts. Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/
facts.html 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019). Sudden 
unexpected infant death and sudden infant death syndrome. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/sids/data.htm 


Cheour-Luhtanen, M., Alho. K., Kujala, T., Reinikainen, K., Renlund, 
M., Aaltonen, O., … & Näätänen R. (1995). Mismatch negativity 
indicates vowel discrimination in newborns. Hearing Research, 
82, 53–58. 

Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1996). 
Temperament: Theory and practice. 
New York: Brunner/Mazel. 

Chi, J. G., Dooling, E. C., & Gilles, F. H. (1977). Left-right asymmetries 
of the temporal speech areas of the human fetus. Archives of 
Neurology, 34, 346–8. 


Chien 
S. (2011). No more top-heavy bias: Infants and adults prefer 
upright faces but not top-heavy geometric or face-like 
patterns. 
Journal of Vision, 11(6):1–14. 

Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. Chomsky, N. (1972). Language and mind. NY: Harcourt 
Brace. 


Clark, E. V. (2009). What shapes children’s language? Child-directed 


speech and the process of acquisition. In V. C. M. Gathercole (Ed.), 
Routes to language: Essays in honor of Melissa Bowerman. NY: 
Psychology Press. 

Clark, L. A., Kochanska, G., & Ready, R. (2000). Mothers’ personality 
and its interaction with child temperament as predictors of 
parenting behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
79, 274–285. 

Clemson University Cooperative Extension. (2014). 
Introducing solid 
foods to infants. Retrieved from 
http://www.clemson.edu/
extension/hgic/food/nutrition/nutrition/life_stages/
hgic4102.html 

Cole, P. M., Armstrong, L. M., & Pemberton, C. K. (2010). The role 
of language in the development of emotional regulation. In S. D. 
Calkins & M. A. Bell (Eds.). Child development at intersection of 
emotion and cognition (pp. 59-77). Washington D.C.: American 
Psychological Association. 


Colvin, J.D., Collie-Akers, V., Schunn, C., & Moon, R.Y. (2014). Sleep 
environment risks for younger and older infants. 
Pediatrics 
Online. Retrieved from 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/
content/pediatrics/early/2014/07/09/peds. 2014-0401.full.pdf 


Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development concepts and 
applications (5th ed.). NJ: Pearson. 

de Boysson-Bardies, B., Sagart, L., & Durand, C. (1984). Discernible 
differences in the babbling of infants according to target 
language. Journal of Child Language, 11(1), 1–15. 


DeCasper, A. J., & Fifer, W. P. (1980). Of human bonding: Newborns 
prefer their mother’s voices. Science, 208, 1174-1176. DeCasper, 
A. J., & Spence, M. J. (1986). Prenatal maternal speech influences 
newborns’ perception of speech sounds. Infant 
Behavior and 
Development, 9, 
133-150. 


Diamond, A. (1985). Development of the ability to use recall to guide 
actions, as indicated by infants’ performance on AB. Child 
Development, 56, 868-883. 

Dobrich, W., & Scarborough, H. S. (1992). Phonological 


characteristics of words young children try to say. Journal of Child 
Language, 19(3), 597–616. 

Dubois, J., Hertz-Pannier, L., Cachia, A., 
Mangin, J. F., Le 
Bihan, D., 
& 
Dehaene-Lambertz, G. (2009). Structural asymmetries in the 
infant language and 
sensori-motor networks. 
Cerebral Cortex, 
19, 
414–423. 

Eisenberg, A., Murkoff, H. E., & Hathaway, S. E. (1989). What to 
expect the first year. New York: Workman Publishing. 


Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Shepard, S. A., Guthrie, I.K., Murphy, 
B.C., & Reiser, M. (1999). Parental reactions to children’s negative 
emotions: Longitudinal relations to quality of children’s social 
functioning. Child Development, 70, 513-534. 

Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Spinrad, T., Gershoff, E., Valiente, C., 
Losoya, S. L., Zhou, Q., 
Cumberland, A., Liew, J., Reiser, M., & 
Maxon, E. (2008). Understanding parent-adolescent conflict 
discussions: Concurrent and across-time prediction 
from youths’ 
dispositions and parenting. Monographs of the Society for 
Research in Child Development, 73, (Serial No. 290, No. 2), 1-160. 

El-Dib, M., Massaro, A. N., Glass, P., & Aly, H. (2012). Neurobehavioral 
assessment as a predictor of neurodevelopmental outcome in 
preterm infants. Journal of Perinatology, 32, 299-303. 

Eliot, L. (1999). 
What’s going on in there? 
New York: Bantam. 
Erikson, E. (1982). 
The life cycle completed. NY: Norton & 
Company. 

Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language universals: 
Language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32(5), 429–448. 

Farroni, T., Johnson, M.H. Menon, E., Zulian, L. Faraguna, D., Csibra, 
G. (2005). Newborns’ preference for face-relevant stimuli: Effects 
of contrast polarity. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 102(47), 17245-17250. 

Fergusson, D. M., & Woodward, L. J. (1999). Breastfeeding and later 
psychosocial adjustment. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 
13, 144-157. 

Fitzpatrick, E.M., Crawford, L., Ni, A., & Durieux-Smith, A. (2011). A 


descriptive analysis of language and speech skills in 4-to- 5-yr-
old children with hearing loss. Ear and Hearing, 32(2), 605-616. 

Freud, S. (1938). An outline of psychoanalysis. London: Hogarth. 

Galler J. R., & Ramsey F. (1989). A follow-up study of the influence 
of early malnutrition on development: Behavior at home and at 
school. American Academy of Child and Adolescence Psychiatry, 
28 (2), 254-61. 

Galler, J. R., Ramsey, F. C., Morely, D. S., Archer, E., & Salt, P. (1990). 
The long-term effects of early kwashiorkor compared with 
marasmus. IV. Performance on the national high school entrance 
examination. Pediatric Research, 28(3), 235- 239. 

Galler, J. R., Ramsey, F. C., Salt, P. & Archer, E. (1987). The long-
term effect of early kwashiorkor compared with marasmus. III. 
Fine motor skills. 
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology Nutrition, 
6, 855-859. 


Giedd, J. N. (2015). The amazing teen brain. Scientific American, 
312(6), 32-37. 


Giles, A., & 
Rovee-Collier, C. (2011). Infant long-term memory for 
associations formed during mere exposure. 
Infant Behavior and 
Development, 34 (2), 
327-338. 

Gillath, O., Shaver, P. R., Baek, J. M., & Chun, D. S. (2008). Genetic 
correlates of adult attachment style. Personality & Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1396–1405. 

Gleitman, L. R., & Newport, E. L. (1995). The invention of language 
by children: Environmental and biological influences on the 
acquisition of language. An Invitation to Cognitive Science, 1, 1-24. 

Goldin-
Meadow, 
S., 
& 
Mylander, 
C. 
(1998). 
Spontaneous 
sign 
systems 
created 
by 
deaf 
children 
in 
two 
cultures. 
Nature, 391(6664), 
279–281. 

Grosse, G., Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Infants 
communicate in order to be understood. Developmental 
Psychology, 46(6), 1710-1722. 


Gunderson, E. P., Hurston, S. R., Ning, X., Lo, J. C., Crites, Y., Walton, 
D…. & Quesenberry, C. P. Jr. (2015). Lactation and progression 


to type 2 diabetes mellitus after gestational diabetes mellitus: 
A prospective cohort study. American Journal of Medicine, 163, 
889-898. Doi: 10.7326/m 15-0807. 

Hainline L. (1978). Developmental changes in visual scanning of face 
and nonface patterns by infants. 
Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 25, 90–115. 

Hamer, R. (2016). The visual world of infants. Scientific American, 
104, 98-101. Harlow, H. F. (1958). The nature of love. American 
Psychologist, 13, 673-685. 


Harris, Y. R. (2005). Cognitive development. In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of human development 
(pp. 276-281). New, York: 
Sage Publications. 


Hart, S., & Carrington, H. (2002). Jealousy in 6-month-old 
infants. 
Infancy, 
3(3), 395-402. 

Hatch, E. M. (1983). Psycholinguistics: A second language 
perspective. Rowley, MA: Newbury House Publishers. Hertenstein, 
M. J., & Campos, J. J. (2004). The retention effects of an adult’s 
emotional displays on infant behavior. Child 
Development, 75(2), 
595–613. 


Holland, D., Chang, L., Ernst, T., Curan, M Dale, A. (2014). Structural 
growth trajectories and rates of change in the 
first 3 months of 
infant brain development. JAMA Neurology, 71(10), 1266-1274. 


Huttenlocher, P. R., & Dabholkar, A. S. (1997). Regional differences 
in synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex. The Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 387(2), 167-178. 

Hyde, J. S., Else-Quest, N. M., & Goldsmith, H. H. (2004). Children’s 
temperament and behavior problems predict their employed 
mothers’ work functioning. Child Development, 75, 580–594. 

Hyvärinen, L., Walthes, R., Jacob, N., Nottingham Chaplin, K., & 
Leonhardt, M. (2014). Current understanding of what infants see. 
Current Opthalmological Report, 2, 142-149. doi:10.1007/
s40135-014-0056-2 

Imai, M., Li, L., Haryu, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & 
Shigematsu, J. (2008). Novel noun and verb learning in Chinese, 
English, and Japanese children: Universality and language-


specificity in novel noun and verb learning. Child Development, 
79, 979-1000. 

Islami, F., Liu, Y., Jemal, A., Zhou, J., Weiderpass, E., Colditz, 
G…Weiss, M. (2015). Breastfeeding and breast cancer risk by 
receptor status – a systematic review and meta-analysis. Annals 
of Oncology, 26, 2398-2407. 

Iverson, J. M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Gesture paves the way 
for language development. Psychological science, 16(5), 367-371. 

Jarrett, C. (2015). 
Great myths of the brain. West Sussex, UK: Wiley. 

Johnson, M. H., & deHaan, M. (2015). Developmental cognitive 
neuroscience: An introduction. Chichester, West Sussex: UK, 
Wiley & Sons 

Jusczyk, P.W., Cutler, A., & Redanz, N.J. (1993). Infants’ preference 
for the predominant stress patterns of English words. Child 
Development, 64, 675–687. 

Karlson, E.W., Mandl, L.A., Hankison, S. E., & Grodstein, F. (2004). Do 
breast-feeding and other reproductive factors influence future 
risk of rheumatoid arthritis? Arthritis & Rheumatism, 50 (11), 
3458-3467. 

Kasprian, G., Langs, G., Brugger, P. C., Bittner, M., Weber, M., 
Arantes, M., & Prayer, D. (2011). The prenatal origin of hemispheric 
asymmetry: an in utero neuroimaging study. Cerebral Cortex, 21, 
1076–1083. 

Kiff, C. J., Lengua, L. J., & Zalewski, M. (2011). Nature and nurturing: 
Parenting in the context of child temperament. Clinical Child and 
Family Psychology Review, 14, 251–301. doi: 10.1007/
s10567-011-0093-4 

Klein, P. J., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1999). Long-term memory, forgetting, 
and deferred imitation in 12-month-old infants. Developmental 
Science, 2(1), 102-113. 


Klinnert, M. D., Campos, J. J., & Sorce, J. F. (1983). Emotions as 
behavior regulators: Social referencing in infancy. In R. Plutchik 
& H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research, and experience 
(pp. 57–86). New York, NY: Academic Press. 


Kolb, B., & 
Fantie, B. (1989). Development of the child’s brain and 
behavior. In C. R. Reynolds & E. Fletcher-Janzen (Eds.), 

Handbook of clinical child neuropsychology (pp. 17–39). New York, 
NY: Plenum Press. 

Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I. Q. (2011). An introduction to brain and 
behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Worth Publishers. 

Kopp, C. B. (2011). Development in the early years: Socialization, 
motor development, and consciousness. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 62, 165-187. 

Latham, M. C. (1997). Human nutrition in the developing world. 
Rome, IT: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. 

Lavelli, M., & Fogel, A. (2005). Developmental changes in the 
relationships between infant attention and emotion during early 
face-to-face communications: The 2 month transition. 
Developmental Psychology, 41, 265-280. 

Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. New York, 
NY: John Wiley & Sons. 

LeVine, R. A., Dixon, S., LeVine, S., Richman, A., Leiderman, P. H., 
Keefer, C. H., & Brazelton, T. B. (1994). Child care and culture: 
Lessons from Africa. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Lewis, M., & Brooks, J. (1978). Self-knowledge and emotional 
development. In M. Lewis & L. A. Rosenblum (Eds.), Genesis of 
behavior (Vol. 1, pp. 205-226). New York: Plenum Press. 

Lewis, T. L., Maurer, D., & Milewski, A. (1979). The development of 
nasal detection in young infants. Investigative Ophthalmology and 
Visual Science Supplement, 19, 271. 

Li, Y., & Ding, Y. (2017). Human visual development. In Y. Liu., & 
W. Chen (Eds.), Pediatric lens diseases (pp. 11-20). 
Singapore: 
Springer. 


Los 
Angles 
County Department of Public Health. 
(2019). 
Breastfeeding vs. formula feeding. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://publichealth.lacounty.gov/LAmoms/lessons/
Breastfeeding/6_BreastfeedingvsFormulaFeeding.pdf 


Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for identifying infants 
as disorganized/disoriented during the Ainsworth Strange 
Situation. In M. T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings 
(Eds.), Attachment inthe Preschool Years (pp.121– 160).Chicago,IL: 
UniversityofChicagoPress. 

Mandel, D. R., Jusczyk, P. W., & Pisoni, D. B. (1995). Infants’ 
recognition of the sound patterns of their own names. 
Psychological Science, 6(5), 314–317. 


Mayberry, R. I., Lock, E., & Kazmi, H. (2002). Development: Linguistic 
ability and early language exposure. Nature, 417(6884), 38. 

Moeller, M.P., & Tomblin, J.B. (2015). An introduction to the 
outcomes of children with hearing loss study. Ear and Hearing, 36 
Suppl (0-1), 4S-13S 

Morelli, G., Rogoff, B., Oppenheim, D., & Goldsmith, D. (1992). 
Cultural variations in infants’ sleeping arrangements: Questions of 
independence. 
Developmental Psychology, 28, 
604-613. 

Nelson, E. A., 
Schiefenhoevel, W., & 
Haimerl, F. (2000). Child care 
practices in 
nonindustrialized 
societies. Pediatrics, 105, e75. 

O’Connor, T. G., Marvin, R. S., Rotter, M., Olrich, J. T., Britner, P. 
A., & The English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team. 
(2003). 
Child-parent attachment following early institutional deprivation. 
Development and Psychopathology, 15, 19- 38. 


Papousek, M. (2007). Communication in early infancy: An arena of 
intersubjective learning. Infant Behavior and Development, 30, 
258-266. 

Pearson Education. (2016). 
Bayley Scales of Infant Development, 
Third Edition. New York: Pearson. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.pearsonclinical.com/childhood/products/
100000123/bayley-scales-of-infant-and-toddler-
development- 
third-edition-bayley-iii.html#tab-details 

Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and brain mechanisms. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Petitto, L. A., & Marentette, P. F. (1991). Babbling in the manual 
mode: Evidence for the ontogeny of language. Science, 251(5000), 
1493–1496. 


Phelps, B. J. (2005). Habituation. In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), Encyclopedia 
of human development (pp. 597-600). New York: Sage 
Publications. 

Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child. New York: 
Basic Books. 

Pickens, J., Field, T., Nawrocki, T., Martinez, A., Soutullo, D., & 
Gonzalez, J. (1994). Full-term and preterm infants’ perception of 
face-voice synchrony. Infant Behavior and Development, 17(4), 
447-455. 

Porter, R. H., Makin, J. W., Davis, L. M., Christensen, K. (1992). 
Responsiveness of infants to olfactory cues from lactating 
females. Infant Behavior and Development, 15, 85-93. 

Redondo, C. M., Gago-Dominguez, M., Ponte, S. M., Castelo, M. 
E., 
Jiang, X., 
Garcia, A.A… 
Castelao, J. E. (2012). Breast feeding, 
parity and breast cancer subtypes in a Spanish cohort. 
PLoS 
One, 
7(7): e40543 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.00040543 

Richardson, B. D. (1980). Malnutrition and nutritional 
anthropometry. Journal of Tropical Pediatrics, 26(3), 80-84. 
Rothbart, M. K., & Bates, J. E. (2006). Temperament. In N. 
Eisenberg (Ed.). Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3: 
Social, 
emotional, and personality development 
(6th 
ed., pp. 
99-116). 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 


Rothbart, M. K., Posner, M. I. & Kieras, J. (2006). Temperament, 
attention, and the development of self-regulation. In M. 
McCartney & D. Phillips (Eds.) Blackwell handbook of early 
childhood development (pp. 3338-357). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 

Rothbaum, F., Weisz, J., Pott, M., Miyake, K., & Morelli, G. 
(2010). 
Attachment and culture: Security in the United States and 
Japan. 
American Psychologist, 55, 1093-1104. 

Rovee-Collier, C. (1987). Learning and memory in infancy. In J. D. 
Osofsky (Ed.), Handbook of infant development, (2nd, ed., 
pp. 
98-148). New York: Wiley. 


Rovee-Collier, C. (1990). The “memory system” of prelinguistic 


infants. Annuals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 608, 
517-542. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-66231990.tb48908. 


Rovee-Collier, C., & Hayne, H. (1987). Reactivation of infant memory: 
Implications for cognitive development. In H. W. Reese (Ed.), 
Advances in child development and behavior. (Vol. 20, pp. 
185-238). London, UK: Academic Press. 

Rymer, R. (1993). Genie: A scientific tragedy. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 

Salkind, N. J. (2005). 
Encyclopedia of human development. New 
York: Sage Publications. 

Schwarz, E. B., Brown, J. S., Creasman, J. M. Stuebe, A., McClure, 
C. K., Van Den Eeden, S. K., & Thom, D. (2010). Lactation and 
maternal risk of type-2 diabetes: A population-based study. 
American Journal of Medicine, 123, 863.e1-863.e6. doi: 10.1016/
j.amjmed.2010.03.016. 


Seifer, R., Schiller, M., Sameroff, A., Resnick, S., & Riordan, K. (1996). 
Attachment, maternal sensitivity, and infant temperament during 
the first year of life. Developmental Psychology, 32, 12-25. 

Sen, M. G., Yonas, A., & Knill, D. C. (2001). Development of infants’ 
sensitivity to surface contour information for spatial layout. 
Perception, 30, 167-176. 

Senghas, R. J., Senghas, A., & Pyers, J. E. (2005). The emergence 
of Nicaraguan Sign Language: Questions of development, 
acquisition, and evolution. In S. T. Parker, J. Langer, & C. Milbrath 
(Eds.), Biology and knowledge revisited: From neurogenesis to 
psychogenesis (pp. 287–306). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 

Shaffer, D. R. (1985). 
Developmental psychology: Theory, research, 
and applications. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, Inc. Skinner, B. F. 
(1953). 
Science and human behavior. 
NY: Free Press. 

Sorce, J. F., Emde, J. J., Campos, J. J., & Klinnert, M. D. (1985). Maternal 
emotional signaling: Its effect on the visual cliff behavior of 
1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 21, 195–200. 

Spelke, E. S., & Cortelyou, A. (1981). Perceptual aspects of social 


knowing: Looking and listening in infancy. Infant social cognition, 
61-84. 

Springer, S. P. & Deutsch, G. (1993). 
Left brain, right brain 
(4th 
ed.). 
New York: W. H. Freeman. 

Stika, C.J., Eisenberg, L.S., Johnson, K.C. Henning, S.C., Colson, B.G., 
Ganguly, D.H., & DesJardin, J.L. (2015). Developmental outcomes 
of early-identified children who are hard of hearing at 12 to 18 
months of age. Early Human Development, 9(1), 47-55. 


Stork, F. & Widdowson, J. (1974). Learning about Linguistics. London: 
Hutchinson. 

Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child development. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 

Thompson, R. A. (2006). The development of the person. In W. 
Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.), 
Handbook of child psychology 
(6th 
Ed.). 
New York: Wiley. 

Thompson, R. A., & Goodvin, R. (2007). Taming the tempest in the 
teapot. In C. A. Brownell & C. B. Kopp (Eds.). Socioemotional 
development in the toddler years: Transitions and 
transformations (pp. 320-342). New York: Guilford. 


Thompson, R. A., Winer, A. C., & Goodvin, R. (2010). The individual 
child: Temperament, emotion, self, and personality. In M. 
Bornstein & M. E. Lamb (Eds.), Developmental science: An 
advanced textbook (6th ed., pp. 423–464). New York, NY: 
Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis. 

Titus-Ernstoff, L., Rees, J. R., Terry, K. L., & Cramer, D. W. (2010). 
Breast-feeding the last-born child and risk of ovarian cancer. 
Cancer Causes Control, 21(2), 201-207. doi: 10.1007/
s10552-009-9450-8 

Tomblin, J. B., Harrison, M., Ambrose, S. E., Walker, E. A., Oleson, J. 
J., & Moeller, M. P. (2015). Language outcomes in young children 
with mild to severe hearing loss. Ear and hearing, 36 Suppl 1(0 1), 
76S–91S. 

United Nations Children’s Fund. (2015). Levels and trends in child 


mortality: Report 2015. United Nations Children’s Fund. 
New York: 
NY. 


United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of 
Women’s Health. (2011). Your guide to breast feeding. 
Washington 
D.C. 


United States National Library of Medicine. 
(2016). 
Circumcision. 
Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/
circumcision.html 

Van den Boom, D. C. (1994). The influence of temperament and 
mothering on attachment and exploration: An experimental 
manipulation of sensitive responsiveness among lower-class 
mothers with irritable infants. Child Development, 65, 1457–1477. 

Van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & Sagi, A. (1999). Cross-cultural patterns 
of attachment. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of 
attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 
713-734). New York: Guilford. 

Webb, S. J., Monk, C. S., & Nelson, C. A. (2001). Mechanisms of 
postnatal neurobiological development: Implications for human 
development. Developmental Neuropsychology, 19, 147-171. 

Weekes-Shackelford, V. A. & Shackelford, T. K. (2005). Sudden Infant 
Death Syndrome (SIDS). In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of 
human development (pp. 1238-1239). New York: Sage 
Publications. 


Werker, J. F., Pegg, J. E., & McLeod, P. J. (1994). A cross-language 
investigation of infant preference for infant-directed 
communication. Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 323-333. 

Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (2002). Cross-language speech 
perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganization during the 
first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development, 25, 121-133. 


Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 3 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


PART 
VII 
DEVELOPMENT IN EARLY 
CHILDHOOD 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore and connect Psychosocial, Cognitive, 
and Psychosexual Development 
Explore and connect another Theory, Approach, 
or Perspective to work in critical thinking skills for 
client assessments 
Exploring important aspects of a person’s 
experience and ability to justify why they are 
important 



Vignette 

Tisha sticking out her tongue at the camera
Photo by Sarah Louise Kinsella on 
Unsplash 

Tisha, 3 y/o, has been 
demonstrating increased 
emotional and behavioral issues 
at her preschool. Her parents, 
Mr. and Mrs. Taylor have been 
called to meet with the Director 
to discuss these concerns. They 
report the same issues occurring 
at home, stating “We have no 
idea why she’s been having such 
a hard time, it was like she went 
to sleep our sweet girl one night 
and woke up a completely 
different child the next morning, 
refusing to listen, tantrums 
anytime she doesn’t get her way, 
she just fights us on everything”. 
They report they adopted Tisha 
when she was an infant and had minimal issues with her until several 
weeks ago when they report the change in behavior occurring. The 
Director discussed increased struggles with Tisha at school, also 
refusing to comply with requests from her teachers and showing 
increased aggression with her peers with hitting and biting, and 
possible need to dismiss Tisha from their program if her disruptive 
behaviors did not stop. 

Mr. and Mrs. Taylor admit they have really struggled with what to 
do, “so we usually just end up letting her have her way because we get 
so tired and frustrated with fighting with her – we just don’t know 
what to do”. The Director explores a referral for mental health services 
that could be provided at the school, discussing how professional 
interventions may be needed due to her history and the Taylors agree 
to an initial assessment. 


Mr. and Mrs. Taylor meet with a Licensed Certified Social Worker 
(LCSW) for an initial assessment. He greets them warmly and then 
invites Tisha to choose some toys to play with while he speaks with her 
parents. Tisha seems uncertain at first and slowly begins to explore 
the toys in the room. The Social Worker invites Mr. and Mrs. Taylor to 
share their story and concerns while Tisha plays and they report their 
history of struggling to conceive and how happy they were to finally 
have a child when Tisha came into their lives. They discussed how 
everything was going very well until the past several weeks when the 
emotional and behavioral struggles began. The Social Worker asked 
if any changes had occurred around the time Mr. and Mrs. Taylor 
noticed Tisha’s change in behavior and they reported none they could 
think of. The Social Worker then explored any information they were 
given about Tisha and her biological parents/family before she came 
into their care. They reported minimal information was given but 
remembering hearing her biological mother had struggled with drug 
use before becoming pregnant but had reported stopping use of all 
drugs except for marijuana while pregnant. Mrs. Taylor states “her 
biological mother had also reported struggles with caring for Tisha 
her first few months but I don’t really know what that means”. 
They 
reported not thinking this had affected Tisha as she had not had 
any major issues during her first couple of years with them but are 
starting to wonder what she may have experienced in her first several 
months before coming to live with them. 


During this time, the Social Worker notices Tisha engages in some 
aggressive play with various people figures and hitting toys together. 
He also notices she is rocking back and forth at times in between her 
play. She also gets increasingly louder when she hears her parents 
speaking. The Social Worker reflects this and Tisha sticks her tongue 
out at him. 


Critical Thinking: 

1. What stage of Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive 
Development is the client currently in? Are they 
meeting expectations of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any delays in this stage? 
Examples? 
2. What stage of Erikson’s Theory of Psychosocial 
Development are they currently in? Are they 
meeting the goals of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any struggles with their goals 
in this stage? Examples? 
3. What theory, approach, or perspective from 
previous Dimensions (PIE, Biopsychosocial, 
Sociocultural, or Social Change) would you use to 
assess this client? Why? 
4. What do you feel are the most important 
aspects (physical development, attachment, sexual 
development, etc) to consider for this client? 
Why? 


References 

Hutchinson, E. D. (2019). Dimensions of human behavior (Sixth 
edition). Sage Publications, Inc. 

 



Chapter 13: Physical 
Development in Early 
Childhood 

Chapter 13 Learning Objectives 

Summarize the overall physical growth 
Describe the changes in brain maturation 
Describe the changes in sleep 
Summarize the changes in gross and motor skills 
Describe when a child is ready for toilet training 
Describe sexual development 
Identify nutritional concerns 


Overall Physical Growth 

Children between the ages of two and six years tend to grow about 
3 inches in height and gain about 4 to 5 pounds in weight each year. 
Just as in infancy, growth occurs in spurts rather than continually. 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2000), 
the average 2-year-old weighs between 23 and 28 pounds and 
stands between 33 and 35 inches tall. The average 6-year-old 


weighs between 40 and 50 pounds and is about 44 to 47 inches 
in height. The 3-year-old is still very similar to a toddler with a 
large head, large stomach, short arms, and legs. By the time the 
child reaches age 6, however, the torso has lengthened, and body 
proportions have become more like those of adults. 

This growth rate is slower than that of infancy and is accompanied 
by a reduced appetite between the ages of 2 and 6. This change can 
sometimes be surprising to parents and lead to the development of 
poor eating habits. However, children between the ages of 2 and 3 
need 1,000 to 1,400 calories, while children between the ages of 4 
and 8 need 1,200 to 2,000 calories (Mayo Clinic, 2016a). 



Brain Maturation 

Brain weight: The brain is about 75 percent of its adult weight 
by three years of age. By age 6, it is at 95 percent of its adult 
weight (Lenroot & Giedd, 2006). Myelination and the development 
of dendrites continue to occur in the cortex and as it does, we see a 
corresponding change in what the child is capable of doing. Greater 
development in the prefrontal cortex, the area of the brain behind 
the forehead that helps us to think, strategize, and control attention 
and emotion, makes it increasingly possible to inhibit emotional 
outbursts and understand how to play games. 

Understanding the game, thinking ahead, and coordinating 
movement improves with practice and myelination. 

Growth in the Hemispheres and Corpus Callosum: 
Between ages 
3 and 6, the left hemisphere of the brain grows dramatically. This 
side of the brain or hemisphere is typically involved in language 
skills. The right hemisphere continues to grow throughout early 
childhood and is involved in tasks that require spatial skills, such 
as recognizing shapes and patterns. The 
corpus callosum, 
a dense 
band of fibers that connects the two hemispheres of the 
brain, 
contains approximately 200 million nerve fibers that connect 
the hemispheres (Kolb & Whishaw, 2011). The corpus callosum is 
illustrated in Figure 4.2. 

Figure 4.2 


The corpus callosum is located a couple of inches below the 
longitudinal fissure, which runs the length of the brain and 
separates the two cerebral hemispheres (Garrett, 2015). Because the 
two hemispheres carry out different functions, they communicate 
with each other and integrate their activities through the corpus 
callosum. Additionally, because incoming information is directed 
toward one hemisphere, such as visual information from the left eye 
being directed to the right hemisphere, the corpus callosum shares 
this information with the other hemisphere. 


The corpus callosum undergoes a growth spurt between ages 3 and 
6, and this results in improved coordination between right and left 
hemisphere tasks. For example, in comparison to other individuals, 
children younger than 6 demonstrate difficulty coordinating an 
Etch A Sketch toy because their corpus callosum is not developed 
enough to integrate the movements of both hands (Kalat, 2016). 


Motor Skill Development 

Early childhood is the time period when most children acquire the 
basic skills for locomotion, such as running, jumping, and skipping, 
and object control skills, such as throwing, catching, and kicking 
(Clark, 1994). Children continue to improve their gross motor skills 
as they run and jump. Fine motor skills are also being refined in 
activities, such as pouring water into a container, drawing, coloring, 
and buttoning coats and using scissors. The table 1 highlights some 
of the changes in motor skills during early childhood between 2 and 
5 years of age. The development of greater coordination of muscle 
groups and finer precision can be seen during this time period. 
Thus, average 2-year-olds may be able to run with slightly better 
coordination than they managed as a toddler, yet they would have 
difficulty peddling a tricycle, something the typical 3-year-old can 
do. We see similar changes in fine motor skills with 4-year-olds 
who no longer struggle to put on their clothes, something they may 
have had problems with two years earlier. Motor skills continue to 
develop into middle childhood, but for those in early childhood, a 
play that deliberately involves these skills is emphasized. 



Children’s Art: 
Children’s art highlights many developmental 
changes. Kellogg (1969) noted that children’s drawings underwent 
several transformations. Starting with about 20 different types of 
scribbles at age 2, children move on to experimenting with the 
placement of scribbles 
on the page. By age 3 they are using the 
basic structure of scribbles to create shapes and are beginning 
to combine these shapes to create more complex images. By 4 
or 5 children are creating images that are more recognizable 
representations of the world. These changes are a function of 
improvement in motor skills, perceptual development, and cognitive 
understanding of the world (Cote & 
Golbeck, 
2007). 

The drawing of tadpoles (see Figure: 4.4) is a pervasive feature of 
young children’s drawings of self and others. Tadpoles emerge in 
children’s drawing at about the age of 3 and have been observed 
in the drawings of young children around the world 
(Gernhardt, 
Rubeling 
& 
Keller, 2015), but there are cultural 
variations in the size, 
number of facial features, and emotional 
expressions 
displayed. 

Gernhardt et al. found that children from Western contexts (i.e., 
urban areas of Germany and Sweden) and urban educated non-


Western contexts (i.e., urban areas of Turkey, Costa Rica and 
Estonia) drew larger images, with more facial detail and more 
positive emotional 
expressions, while those from non-Western rural 
contexts (i.e., rural areas of Cameroon and India) depicted 
themselves as smaller, with less facial details and a more neutral 
emotional expression. The authors suggest that cultural norms of 
non-Western traditionally rural cultures, which emphasize the 
social group rather than the individual, maybe one of the factors for 
the smaller size of the figures compared to the larger figures from 
children in the Western cultures which emphasize the individual. 

Table 4.1 


Toilet Training 

Toilet training typically occurs during the first two years of early 
childhood (24-36 months). Some children show interest by age 2, 
but others may not be ready until months later. The average age for 
girls to be toilet trained is 29 months and for boys, it is 31 months, 
and 98% of children are trained by 36 months (Boyse & Fitzgerald, 
2010). The child’s age is not as important as his/her physical and 
emotional readiness. If it started too early, it might take longer to 
train a child. If a child resists being trained or is not successful 
after a few weeks, it is best to take a break and try again later. 
Most children master daytime bladder control first, typically within 
two to three months of consistent toilet training. However, nap and 
nighttime training might take months or even years. 

According to the Mayo Clinic (2016b), the following questions can 
help parents determine if a child is ready for toilet training: 

Does your child seem interested in the potty chair or toilet, or 



in wearing 
underwear? 
Can your child understand and follow basic 
directions? 
Does your child complain about wet or dirty 
diapers? 
Does your child tell you through words, facial expressions or 
posture when he or 
she needs to 
go? 
Does your child stay dry for periods of two hours or longer 
during the 
day? 
Can your child pull down his or her pants and pull them 
up 
again? 
Can your child sit on and rise from a potty chair? (p. 
1) 


Some children experience elimination disorders that may require 
intervention by the child’s pediatrician or a trained mental health 
practitioner. Elimination disorders include enuresis, or the repeated 
voiding of urine into bed or clothes (involuntary or intentional) and 
encopresis, the repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places 
(involuntary or intentional) (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 
The prevalence of enuresis is 5%-10% for 5-year-olds, 3%-5% for 
10-year-olds and approximately 1% for those 15 years of age or older. 
Around 1% of 5-year- olds have encopresis, and it is more common 
in males than females. 


Sleep 

During early childhood, there is a wide variation in the number 
of hours of sleep recommended per day. For example, two-year-
olds may still need 15-16 hours per day, while a six-year-old may 
only need 7-8 hours. The National Sleep Foundation’s 2015 
recommendations based on age are listed in Figure 4.6. 

Figure 4.6 


Sexual Development in Early Childhood 

Historically, children have been thought of as innocent or incapable 
of sexual arousal (Aries, 1962). Yet, the physical dimension of sexual 
arousal is present from birth. However, to associate the elements of 
seduction, power, love, or lust that is part of the adult meanings of 
sexuality would be inappropriate. Sexuality begins in childhood as a 
response to physical states and sensation and cannot be interpreted 
as similar to that of adults in any way (Carroll, 2007). 

Infancy: Boys and girls are capable of erections and vaginal 
lubrication even before birth (Martinson, 1981). Arousal can signal 
overall physical contentment and stimulation that accompanies 
feeding or warmth. Infants begin to explore their bodies and touch 
their genitals as soon as they have sufficient motor skills. This 
stimulation is for comfort or to relieve tension rather than to reach 
orgasm (Carroll, 2007). 


Early Childhood: Self-stimulation is common in early childhood for 
both boys and 
girls. Curiosity about the body and about others’ 
bodies is a natural part of early childhood as well. As children grow, 
they are more likely to show their genitals to siblings or peers, and 
to take off their clothes and touch each other (Okami, Olmstead, & 
Abramson, 1997). Masturbation is common for both boys and girls. 
Boys are often shown by other boys how to masturbate, but girls 
tend to find out accidentally. Additionally, boys masturbate more 
often and touch themselves more openly than do girls (Schwartz, 
1999). 


Hopefully, parents respond to this without an undue alarm and 
without making the child feel guilty about their bodies. Instead, 
messages about what is going on and the appropriate time and place 
for such activities help the child learn what is appropriate. 

Nutritional Concerns 

In addition to those in early childhood have a smaller appetite, 
their parents may notice a general reticence to try new foods, or 
a preference for certain foods often served or eaten in a particular 
way. Some of these changes can be traced back to the “just right” 
(or just-so) phenomenon that is common in early childhood. Many 
young children desire consistency and may be upset if there are 
even slight changes to their daily routines. They may like to line 
up their toys or other objects or place them in symmetric patterns. 
They may arrange the objects until they feel “just right”. Many young 
children have a set bedtime ritual and a strong preference for 
certain clothes, toys or games. All these tendencies tend to wane 
as children approach middle childhood, and the familiarity of such 
ritualistic behaviors seem to bring a sense of security and a general 
reduction in childhood fears and anxiety (Evans, Gray, & Leckman, 
1999; Evans & Leckman, 2015). 


Malnutrition due to insufficient food is not common in developed 
nations, like the United States, yet many children lack a balanced 
diet. Added sugars and solid fats contribute to 40% of daily calories 
for children and teens in the US. Approximately half of these empty 
calories come from six sources: soda, fruit drinks, dairy desserts, 
grain desserts, pizza, and whole milk (CDC, 2015). Caregivers need 
to keep in mind that they are setting up taste preferences at this 
age. Young children who grow accustomed to a high fat, very sweet 
and salty flavors may have trouble eating foods that have subtler 
flavors, such as fruits and vegetables. Consider the following advice 
(See Box 4.1) about establishing eating patterns for years to come 
(Rice, 1997). Notice that keeping mealtime pleasant, providing sound 
nutrition and not engaging in power struggles over food are the 
main goals: 



Tips for Establishing Healthy Eating Patterns 

Recognize that appetite varies. Children may eat 
well at one meal and have no appetite at another. 
Rather than seeing this as a problem, it may help 
to realize that appetites do vary. Continue to 
provide good nutrition, but do not worry 
excessively if the child does not eat at a particular 
meal. 
Keep it pleasant. This tip is designed to help 
caregivers create a positive atmosphere during 
mealtime. Mealtimes should not be the time for 
arguments or expressing tensions. You do not 
want the child to have painful memories of 
mealtimes together or have nervous stomachs and 
problems eating and digesting food due to stress. 
No short-order chefs. While it is fine to prepare 
foods that children enjoy, preparing a different 
meal for each child or family member sets up an 
unrealistic expectation from others. Children 
probably do best when they are hungry, and a 
meal is ready. Limiting snacks rather than allowing 
children to “graze” can help create an appetite for 
what is being served. 
Limit choices. If you give your young child 
choices, make sure that you give them one or two 
specific choices rather than asking “What would 
you like for lunch?” If given an open choice, 
children may change their minds or ask for 
something that is not available or appropriate. 
Serve balanced meals. This tip encourages 



caregivers to serve balanced meals. A box of 
macaroni and cheese is not a balanced meal. 
Meals prepared at home tend to have better 
nutritional value than fast food or frozen dinners. 
Prepared foods tend to be higher in fat and sugar 
content, as these ingredients enhance taste and 
profit margin because fresh food is often costlier 
and less profitable. However, preparing fresh food 
at home is not costly. It does, however, require 
more activity. Preparing meals and including the 
children in kitchen chores can provide a fun and 
memorable experience. 
Do not bribe. Bribing a child to eat vegetables by 
promising desert is not a good idea. The child will 
likely find a way to get the desert without eating 
the vegetables (by whining or fidgeting, perhaps, 
until the caregiver gives in). In addition, bribery 
teaches the child that some foods are better than 
others. Children tend to naturally enjoy a variety 
of foods until they are taught that some are 
considered less desirable than others. Most 
important is not to force your child to eat or fight 
overeating food. 


References 

Abuhatoum, S., & Howe, N. (2013). Power in sibling 
conflict during early and middle childhood. Social 
Development, 22, 738- 754. 


Al-Haddad, B., Jacobsson, B., Chabra, S., 
Modzelewska, D., Olson, E……. Sengpiel, V. (2019). 
Long-term risk of neuropsychiatric disease after 
exposure to infection in utero. JAMA Psychiatry, 76(6), 
594-602. 

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2015). 
Gender 
identity development in children. Retrieved from 
https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-
stages/ gradeschool/Pages/Gender-Identity-and-
Gender-Confusion-In- Children.aspx 

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2016). Media and 
young minds. Retrieved 
from 
https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/
138/5/e20162591 


American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders, 5th edition 
(DSM-5). 
Washington, DC: Author. 


American Psychological Association. 
(2019). 
Immigration. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.apa.org/advocacy/immigration 

Ariès, P. (1962). Centuries of childhood: A social 
history of family life. New York: Knopf. 

Armor, D. J. (2015). Head Start or false start. USA 
Today Magazine. Retrieved from 
https://www.questia.com/magazine/1G1-429736352/
head-start-or-false-start 

Autism Genome Project Consortium. (2007). 
Mapping autism risk loci using genetic linkage and 


chromosomal rearrangements. Nature Genetics, 39, 
319–328. 


Baio, J., Wiggins, L., Christensen, D., Maenner, M., 
……. Dowling, N. (2018). Prevalence of autism spectrum 
disorder among children aged 8 years-autism and 
developmental disabilities monitoring network, 11 
sites, United States, 2014. MMWR Surveillance 
Summary, 67(No. SS-6), 1-23. doi: http://dx.doi.org/
a0.15585/mmwr.ss6706a1External 


Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of 
control. New York: Freeman. 

Barshay, J. (2015). Report: Scant scientific evidence 
for Head Start programs’ effectiveness. U.S. News and 
World Report. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/ 2015/
08/03/report-scant-scientific-evidence-for-head-
start- 
programs-effectiveness 

Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental 
authority. Developmental Psychology Monograph, 4(1), 
part 2. 

Baumrind, D. (2013). Authoritative parenting 
revisited: History and current status. In R. E. 
Larzelere, A. Sheffield, & A. W. Harrist (Eds.). 
Authoritative parenting: Synthesizing nurturance and 
discipline for optimal child development (pp. 11- 34). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Bem, S. L. (1981). Gender schema theory: A cognitive 
account of sex typing. 
Psychological Review, 
88, 
354-364. Berk, L. E. (2007). 
Development through 
the life span 
(4th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 


Berwid, O., Curko-Kera, E. A., Marks, D. J., & 
Halperin, J. M. (2005). Sustained attention and 
response inhibition in young children at risk for 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46(11), 1219- 1229. 

Bialystok, E. (2011). Coordination of executive 
functions in monolingual and bilingual children. 
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 110, 
461–468. 

Bialystok, E., Martin, M.M., & Viswanathan, M. 
(2005). Bilingualism across the lifespan: The rise and 
fall of inhibitory control. International Journal of 
Bilingualism, 9, 103–119. 


Bibok, M.B., Carpendale, J.I.M., & Muller, U. (2009). 
Parental scaffolding and the development of executive 
function. New Directions for Child and Adolescent 
Development, 123, 17-34. 

Bigler, R. S., & Liben, L. S. (2007). Developmental 
intergroup theory: Exploring and reducing children’s 
social stereotyping and prejudice. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 16, 162-166. 

Birch, S., & Bloom, P. (2003). Children are cursed: An 
asymmetric bias in mental-state 
attribution. 
Psychological Science, 
14(3), 283-286. 

Blackless, M., Charuvastra, A., Derryck, A., Fausto-
Sterling, A., Lauzanne, K., & Lee, E. (2000). How 
sexually dimorphic are we? Review and synthesis. 
American Journal of Human Biology, 12, 151-166. 

Bonifacci, P., Giombini, L., Beloocchi, S., & Conteno, 


S. (2011). Speed of processing, anticipation, inhibition 
and working memory in bilinguals. Developmental 
Science, 14, 256–269. 

Boyse, K. & Fitgerald, K. (2010). 
Toilet training. 
University of Michigan Health System. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.med.umich.edu/yourchild/topics/
toilet.htm 

Brody, G. H., Stoneman, Z., & McCoy, J. K. (1994). 
Forecasting sibling relationships in early adolescence 
from child temperament and family processes in 
middle childhood. 
Child development, 65, 
771-784. 

Brown, G.L., Mangelsdork, S.C., Agathen, J.M., & Ho, 
M. (2008). Young children’s psychological selves: 
Convergence with maternal reports of child 
personality. Social Development, 17, 161-182. 

Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Employment 
characteristics of families-2018. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/
famee.pdf 


Bussey, K., & Bandura, A. (1999). Social cognitive 
theory of gender development and 
differentiation. 
Psychological Review, 106(4), 676-713. 


Byrd, R. (2002). 
Report to the legislature on the 
principal findings from the epidemiology of autism in 
California: A comprehensive pilot study. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.dds.ca.gov/Autism/
MindReport.cfm 

Camarota, S. A., & Zeigler, K. (2015). 
One in five U. S. 
residents speaks foreign language at home. Retrieved 


from 
https://cis.org/sites/default/files/camarota-
language-15.pdf 

Carroll, J. L. (2007). Sexuality now: Embracing 
diversity (2nd ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). 
2000 CDC Growth Charts for the United States: 
Methods and Development. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_11/
sr11_246.pdf 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). 
Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders, autism and 
developmental disabilities monitoring network, 14 
sites, United States, 2008. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report: Surveillance Summaries, 61(3), 1–19. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/
ss6103.pdf 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). 
Nutrition and 
health 
of young people. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.cdc.gov/healthyschools/nutrition/
facts.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(2019). 
About adverse childhood 
experiences. 
Retrived 
from 
https://www.cdc.gov/
violenceprevention/childabuseandneglect/acestudy/
aboutace.html 

Chang, A., Sandhofer, C., & Brown, C. S. (2011). 
Gender biases in early number exposure to 
preschool-aged children. Journal of Language and 
Social Psychology, 30(4), 440-450. 



Chiong, C., & Shuler, C. (2010). 
Learning: Is there an 
app for that? Investigations of young children’s usage 
and learning with mobile devices and apps. New York: 
The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop. 
Retrieved from: 
https://clalliance.org/wp-content/
uploads/files/learningapps_final_110410.pdf 

Christakis, D.A. (2009). The effects of infant media 
usage: What do we know and what should we learn? 
Acta Paediatrica, 98, 8–16. 


Clark, J. (1994). Motor development. In V. S. 
Ramachandran (Ed.), Encyclopedia of human behavior 
(pp. 245–255). San Diego: Academic Press. 


Colwell, M.J., & Lindsey, E.W. (2003). Teacher-child 
interactions and preschool children’s perceptions of 
self and peers. Early Childhood Development & Care, 
173, 249-258. 

Coté, C. A., & Golbeck, S. (2007). Preschoolers’ 
feature placement on own and others’ person 
drawings. International Journal of Early Years 
Education, 15(3), 231-243. 

Courage, M.L., Murphy, A.N., & Goulding, S. (2010). 
When the television is on: The impact of infant-
directed video on 6- and 18-month-olds’ attention 
during toy play and on parent-infant interaction. 
Infant Behavior and Development, 33, 176- 188. 

Crain, W. (2005). 
Theories of development concepts 
and applications 
(5th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson. 

De Houwer, A. (2007). Parental language input 


patterns and children’s bilingual use. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 28, 411–422 


DeStefano, F., Price, C. S., & Weintraub, E. S. (2013). 
Increasing exposures to antibody-stimulating proteins 
and polysaccharides in vaccines is not associated with 
risk of autism. The Journal of Pediatrics, 163, 561–567. 

Dougherty, D.M., Marsh, D.M., Mathias, C.W., & 
Swann, A.C. (2005). The conceptualization of 
impulsivity: Bipolar disorder and substance abuse. 
Psychiatric Times, 22(8), 32-35. 

Dunn, J., & Munn, P. (1987). Development of 
justification in disputes with mother and sibling. 
Developmental Psychology, 23, 791-798. 

Dyer, S., & Moneta, G. B. (2006). Frequency of 
parallel, associative, and cooperative play in British 
children of different socio- economic status. 
Social 
Behavior and Personality, 34(5), 
587-592. 

Economist Data Team. (2017). Parents now spend 
twice as much time with their children as 50 years 
ago. Retrieved from 
https://www.economist.com/
graphic-detail/2017/11/27/parents-now-spend-
twice-as-much-time-with-their-children-
as- 
50-years-ago 


Epley, N., Morewedge, C. K., & Keysar, B. (2004). 
Perspective taking in children and adults: Equivalent 
egocentrism but differential correction. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 760–768. 


Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed. NY: 
Norton & Company. 


Evans, D. W., Gray, F. L., & Leckman, J. F. (1999). The 
rituals, fears and phobias of young children: Insights 
from development, psychopathology and 
neurobiology. Child Psychiatry and Human 
Development, 29(4), 261-276. doi:10.1023/
A:1021392931450 

Evans, D. W. & Leckman, J. F. (2015) Origins of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder: Developmental and 
evolutionary perspectives. In D. Cicchetti and D. J. 
Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psychopathology (2nd 
edition). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons. doi: 10.1002/
9780470939406.ch10 

Fay-Stammbach, T., Hawes, D. J., & Meredith, P. 
(2014). Parenting influences on executive function in 
early childhood: A review. Child Development 
Perspectives, 8(4), 258-264. 

Felitti, V. J., Anda, R.F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, 
D. F., Spitz, A., Edwards, V., Koss, M. P., & Marks, J. S. 
(1998). 

Relationship of childhood abuse and household 
dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in 
adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) 
Study. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 14(4), 
245-258. doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(98)00017-8 

Finkelhorn, D., Hotaling, G., Lewis, I. A., & Smith, C. 
(1990). Sexual abuse in a national survey of adult men 
and women: Prevalence, characteristics, and risk 
factors. Child Abuse and Neglect, 14(1), 19-28. 

Frank, G., Plunkett, S. W., & Otten, M. P. (2010). 
Perceived parenting, self-esteem, and general self-


efficacy of Iranian American adolescents. 
Journal of 
Child & Family Studies, 19, 738-746. 

Galotti, K. M. (2018). Cognitive psychology: In and 
out of the laboratory (6th 
Ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. Garrett, B. (2015). Brain and behavior: An 
introduction to biological psychology (4th Ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Gauthier, J., Siddiqui, T. J., Huashan, P., Yokomaku, 
D., Hamdan, F. F., Champagne, N., . . . Rouleau, G.A. 
(2011). Truncating mutations in NRXN2 and NRXN1 in 
autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia. Human 
Genetics, 130, 563–573. 

Gecas, V., & 
Seff, M. (1991). Families and adolescents. 
In A. Booth (Ed.), 
Contemporary families: Looking 
forward, looking back. 
Minneapolis, MN: National 
Council on Family Relations. 

Gentile, D.A., & Walsh, D.A. (2002). A normative 
study of family media habits. Applied Developmental 
Psychology, 23, 157- 178. 


Gernhardt, A., 
Rubeling, H., & Keller, H. (2015). 
Cultural perspectives on children’s tadpole drawings: 
At the interface between representation and 
production. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, Article 812. 
doi: 
0.3389/fpsyg.2015.00812. 

Gershoff, E. T. (2008). Report on physical 
punishment in the United States: What research tell 
us about its effects on children. 
Columbus, OH: 
Center for Effective Discipline. 


Glass, E., Sachse, S., & von Suchodoletz, W. (2008). 


Development of auditory sensory memory from 2 to 6 
years: An MMN study. Journal of Neural Transmission, 
115(8), 1221-1229.doi:10.1007/s00702-008-0088-6 

Gleason, T. R. (2002). Social provisions of real and 
imaginary relationships in early childhood. 
Developmental Psychology, 38, 979-992. 

Gleason, T. R., & Hohmann, L. M. (2006). Concepts 
of real and imaginary friendships in early childhood. 
Social Development, 15, 128-144. 

Gleason, T. R., Sebanc, A. M., & Hartup, W. W. 
(2000). Imaginary companions of preschool children. 
Developmental Psychology, 36(4), 419-428. 

Gomes, G. Sussman, E., Ritter, W., Kurtzberg, D., 
Vaughan, H. D. Jr., & Cowen, N. (1999). 
Electrophysiological evidence of development 
changes in the duration of auditory sensory memory. 
Developmental Psychology, 35, 294-302. 

Goodvin, R., Meyer, S. Thompson, R.A., & Hayes, R. 
(2008). Self-understanding in early childhood: 
Associations with child attachment security and 
maternal negative affect. Attachment & Human 
Development, 10(4), 433-450. 

Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H.M. (2012). Reconstructing 
constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning 
mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological 
Bulletin, 138(6), 1085-1108. 

Guy, J., Rogers, M., & Cornish, K. (2013). Age-related 
changes in visual and auditory sustained attention in 


preschool-aged children. 
Child 
Neuropsychology, 
19(6), 601–614. Retrieved 
from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09297049.2012.710321 

Hammer C. S., Hoff, E., Uchikosh1, Y., Gillanders, C., 
Castro, D., & Sandilos, L. E. (2014). The language 
literacy development of young dual language learners: 
A critical review. Early Child Research Quarterly, 29(4), 
715-733. 

Harter, S., & Pike, R. (1984). The pictorial scale of 
Perceived Competence and Social Acceptance for 
Young Children. Child Development, 55, 1969-1982. 

Harvard University. (2019). 
Center on the developing 
child: Toxic stress. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://developingchild.harvard.edu/science/
key-concepts/toxic-stress/ 

Herrmann, E., Misch, A., Hernandez-Lloreda, V., & 
Tomasello, M. (2015). Uniquely human self-control 
begins at school age. 
Developmental Science, 18(6), 
979-993. doi:10.1111/desc.12272. 


Herrmann, E., & Tomasello, M. (2015). Focusing and 
shifting attention in human children (homo sapiens) 
and chimpanzees (pan troglodytes). 
Journal of 
Comparative Psychology, 129(3), 268–274. Retrieved 
from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0039384 

Hoff, E. (2018). Bilingual development in children of 
immigrant families. Child Development Perspectives, 
12(2), 80-86. 

Howe, N., Rinaldi, C. M., Jennings, M., & Petrakos, H. 
(2002). “No! The lambs can stay out because they got 


cozies”: Constructive and destructive sibling conflict, 
pretend play, and social understanding. Child 
Development, 73, 1406- 1473. 

Hughes, V. (2007). Mercury rising. 
Nature Medicine, 
13, 896-897. 

Imai, M., Li, L., Haryu, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, 
R. M., & Shigematsu, J. (2008). Novel noun and verb 
learning in Chinese, English, and Japanese children: 
Universality and language-specificity in novel noun 
and verb learning. Child Development, 79, 979-1000. 

Jarne, P., & Auld, J. R. (2006). Animals mix it up too: 
The distribution of self-fertilization among 
hermaphroditic animals. Evolution, 60, 1816–1824. 

Jones, P.R., Moore, D.R., & 
Amitay, S. (2015). 
Development of auditory selective attention: Why 
children struggle to hear in noisy 
environments. 
Developmental Psychology, 51(3), 
353–369. Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
a0038570 

Kalat, J. W. (2016). Biological Psychology (12th Ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage. 

Kaushanskaya, M., Gross, M., & Buac, M. (2014). 
Effects of classroom bilingualism on task-shifting, 
verbal memory, and word learning in children. 
Developmental Science, 17(4), 564-583. 

Kellogg, R. (1969). Handbook for Rhoda Kellogg: 
Child art collection. Washington D. C.: NCR/
Microcard Editions. 

Kemple, K.M., (1995). Shyness and self-esteem in 


early childhood. Journal of Humanistic Education and 
Development, 33(4), 173-182. 

Kimmel, M. S. (2008). The gendered society (3rd 
ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kinney, D. K., Barch, D. H., Chayka, B., Napoleon, S., 
& Munir, K. M. (2009). Environmental risk factors for 
autism: Do they help or cause de novo genetic 
mutations that contribute to the disorder? Medical 
Hypotheses, 74, 102–106. 

Kirkorian, H.L., Choi, K., & Pempek, T.A. (2016). 
Toddlers’ word learning from contingent and 
noncontingent video on touch screens. Child 
Development, 87(2), 405–413. 

Kirkorian, H.L., Pempek, T.A., & Murphy, L.A. (2009). 
The impact of background television on parent-child 
interaction. Child Development, 80, 1350-1359. 

Knorr, C. (2017). 
Gender stereotypes are messing 
with your kid. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/blog/
gender-stereotypes-are-messing-with-your-kid 

Kohn, M. L. (1977). Class and conformity. (2nd ed.). 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I. Q. (2011). An introduction to 
brain and behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Worth 
Publishers. 

Kramer, L., & Gottman, J. M. (1992). Becoming a 
sibling: “With a little help from my friends.” 
Developmental Psychology, 28, 685-699. 

Lenroot, R. K., & Giedd, J. N. (2006). Brain 


development in children and adolescents: Insights 
from anatomical magnetic resonance imaging. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 718-729. 

Maccoby, E., & Jacklin, C. (1987). Gender segregation 
in childhood. Advances in Child Development and 
Behavior, 20, 239-287. 

MacKenzie, M. J., Nicklas, E., Waldfogel, J., & 
Brooks-Gunn, J. (2013). Spanking and child 
development across the first decade of life. Pediatrics, 
132(5), e1118-e1125. 

Madigan, S., Browne, D., Racine, N., Mori, C., & 
Tough, S. (2019). Association between screen time and 
children’s performance on a developmental screening 
test. JAMA Pediatrics, 173(3), 244-250. 

Manosevitz, M., Prentice, N. M., & Wilson, F. (1973). 
Individual and family correlates of imaginary 
companions in preschool children. Developmental 
Psychology, 8, 72-79. 

Martinson, F. M. (1981). Eroticism in infancy and 
childhood. In L. L. Constantine & F. M. Martinson 
(Eds.), Children and sex: New findings, new 
perspectives. (pp. 23-35). Boston: Little, Brown. 

Masih, V. (1978). Imaginary play companions of 
children. In R. Weizman, R. Brown, P. Levinson, & P. 
Taylor (Eds.). 
Piagetian theory and the helping 
profession 
(pp. 136-144). Los Angeles: University of 
Southern California Press. 

Mauro, J. (1991). The friend that only I can see: A 


longitudinal investigation of children’s imaginary 
companions. Dissertation, University of Oregon. 

Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016a). 
Nutrition for kids: 
Guidelines for a healthy diet. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy- 
lifestyle/
childrens-health/in-depth/nutrition-for-kids/
art-20049335 

Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016b). 
Potty training: How to get 
the job done. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy- 
lifestyle/
infant-and-toddler-health/indepth/potty-training/
art-20045230 

McAlister, A. R., & Peterson, C. C. (2007). A 
longitudinal study of siblings and theory of mind 
development. Cognitive Development, 22, 258-270. 

Meek, S. E., Lemery-Chalfant, K., Jahromi, L. D., & 
Valiente, C. (2013). A review of gene-environment 
correlations and their implications for autism: A 
conceptual model. Psychological Review, 120, 497–521. 

Merrick, M. T., Ford, D. C., Ports, K. A., & Guinn, A. S. 
(2018). Prevalence of adverse childhood experiences 
from the 2011- 2014 Behavioral Risk Factor 
Surveillance System in 23 States. Early JAMA 
Pediatrics, 172(11), 1038-1044. 

Meyers-Sutton, C. (2005). 
Multiple voices: An 
introduction 
ot 
bilingualism. Malden, MA: Blackwell 
Publishers. 

Middlebrooks, J. S., & Audage, N. C. (2008). The 
effects of childhood stress on health across the 


lifespan. (United States, Center for Disease Control, 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control). 
Atlanta, GA. 


Mischel, W., Ayduk, O., Berman, M. G., Casey, B. J., 
Gotlib, I. H., Jonides, J., & … Shoda, Y. (2011). 
‘Willpower’ over the life span: Decomposing self-
regulation. Social Cognitive & Affective Neuroscience, 
6(2), 252-256. doi:10.1093/scan/nsq081 

Mischel, W., Ebbesen, E. B., & Zeiss, A. R. (1972). 
Cognitive and attentional mechanisms in delay of 
gratification. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 21, 204–218. 

Morra, S., Gobbo, C., Marini, Z., & Sheese, R. (2008). 
Cognitive development: Neo-Piagetian perspectives. 
New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

National Association for the Education of Young 
Children. (2016). 
The 10 NAEYC program 
standards. 
Retrieved from 
http://families.naeyc.org/
accredited-article/10-naeyc-program-standards 

National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development. (2006). The NICHD study of early child 
care (NIH Pub. No. 05- 4318). Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office. 


Nelson, K., & Fivush, R. (2004). The emergence of 
autobiographical memory: A social cultural 
developmental theory. Psychological Review, 
111(2), 
468-511. 


Nelson, K., & Ross, G. (1980). The generalities and 
specifics of long-term memory in infants and young 


children. In M. Perlmutter (Ed.), Children’s memory: 
New directions in child development (Vol. 10, pp. 
87-101). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 


Nielsen Company. (2009). 
Television audience 
2008-2009. Retrieved from 
http://blog.nielsen.com/
nielsenwire/wp-content/uploads/2009/07/
tva_2008_071709.pdf 


Novella, S. (2008). 
The increase in autism diagnoses: 
Two hypotheses 
[Web log post]. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.sciencebasedmedicine.org/the-
increase-in-autism-diagnoses-two-hypotheses/ 

Okami, P., Olmstead, R., & Abramson, P. R. (1997). 
Sexual experiences in early childhood: 18-year 
longitudinal data from UCLA Family Lifestyles Project. 
Journal of Sex Research, 34(4), 339-347. 

Olson, K. R., & Gülgöz, S. (2018). Early findings from 
the TransYouth Project: Gender development in 
transgender children. 
Child Development 
Perspectives, 12(2), 93-97. 


Parten, M. B. (1932). Social participation among 
preschool children. Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology, 27, 243-269. Perner, J., Ruffman, T., & 
Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of mind is contagious: 
You catch from your sibs. Child Development, 
65, 
1228-1238. 


Pike, A., Coldwell, J., & Dunn, J. F. (2005). Sibling 
relationships in early/middle childhood: Links with 
individual adjustment. Journal of Family Psychology, 
19(4), 523-532. 



Place, S., & Hoff, E. (2016). Effects and non-effects of 
input in bilingual environments on dual language skills 
in 2 1/2-year-olds. Bilingualism: Language and 
Cognition, 19, 1023–1041. 


Porporino, M., Shore, D.I., Iarocci, G., & Burack, J.A. 
(2004). A developmental change in selective attention 
and global form perception. International Journal of 
Behavioral Development, 28 (4), 358–364 doi:10.1080/
01650250444000063 

Posner, M.I., & Rothbart, M.K. (2007). Research on 
attention networks as a model for the integration of 
psychological science. Annual Review in Psychology, 
58, 1–23 


Price-Williams, D.R., Gordon, W., & Ramirez, M. 
(1969). Skill and conservation: A study of pottery 
making children. Developmental Psychology, 1, 
769. 


Ram, A., & Ross, H. (2008). “We got to figure it out”: 
Information-sharing and siblings’ negotiations of 
conflicts of interest. Social Development, 17, 
512-527. 


Rice, F. P. (1997). Human development: A life-span 
approach. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Rideout, V.J., & Hamel E. (2006). The media family: 
Electronic media in the lives of infants, 
toddlers, 
preschoolers and their parents. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.kff.org/entmedia/upload/
7500.pdf 


Robinson, T.N., Wilde, M.L., & Navracruz, L.C. (2001). 
Effects of reducing children’s television and video 
game use on aggressive behavior: A randomized 


controlled trial. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, 155, 17-23. 

Rothbart, M.K., & Rueda, M.R. (2005). The 
development of effortful control. In U. Mayr, E. Awh, & 
S.W. Keele (Eds.), Developing individuality in the 
human brain: A festschrift honoring Michael I. Posner 
(pp. 167–88). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association 

Ruble, D.N., Boggiano, A.K., Feldman, N.S., & Loeble, 
J.H. (1980). Developmental analysis of the role of social 
comparison in self-evaluation. Developmental 
Psychology, 16, 105-115. 

Ruble, D. N., Martin, C., & Berenbaum, S. (2006). 
Gender development. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner 
(Series Eds.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of 
child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and 
personality development (6th ed., pp. 858–932). New 
York, NY: Wiley. 

Russo, F. (2016). Debate growing about how to meet 
the urgent needs of transgender kids. Scientific 
American Mind, 27(1), 27- 35. 

Ryan, C. (2013). Language use in the United States: 
2011. Retrieved from https://www2.census.gov/
library/publications/2013/acs/acs-22/acs-22.pdf 

Save the Children. (2019). 
Child 
protection. 
Retrived 
from 
https://www.savethechildren.net/what-we-do/child-protection 

Schmidt, M.E., Pempek, T.A., & Kirkorian, H.L. 
(2008). The effects of background television on the 


toy play behavior of very young children. Child 
Development, 79, 1137-1151. 


Schneider, W., Kron-Sperl, V., & Hunnerkopf, M. 
(2009). The development of young children’s memory 
strategies: Evidence from the Würzburg longitudinal 
memory study. European Journal of Developmental 
Psychology, 6(1), 70-99. 

Schwartz, I. M. (1999). Sexual activity prior to coitus 
initiation: A comparison between males and females. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 28(1), 63-69. 

Shahaeian, A., Peterson, C. C., Slaughter, V., & 
Wellman, H. M. (2011). Culture and the sequence of 
steps in theory of mind development. Developmental 
Psychology, 47(5), 1239-1247. 

Singer, D., & Singer, J. (1990). The house of make-
believe. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Smith, B. L. (2012). The case against spanking. Monitor 
on Psychology, 43(4), 60. 

Society for Research in Child Development. 
(2018). 
The Science is clear: Separating families has 
long-term damaging psychological and health 
consequences for children, families, and communities. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.srcd.org/policy-media/
statements-evidence 

Spears Brown, C., & Jewell, J. A. (2018). 
Gender. 
Retrieved from 
https://nobaproject.com/modules/
gender 

Steele, B.F. (1986). Notes on the lasting effects of 


early child abuse throughout the life cycle. Child 
Abuse & Neglect 10(3), 283-291. 


Tamana, S.K., Ezeugwu, E., Chikuma, J., Lefebvre, 
D.L., Azad, M.B., Moraes, T.J.,… & Mandhane, P. J. 
(2019). Screen-time is associated with inattention 
problems in preschoolers: Results from the CHILD 
birth cohort study. PLOS ONE, 14(4), e0213995. 
Retrieved from https://journals.plos.org/plosone/
article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0213995 


Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child 
development. Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 

Traverso, L., Viterbori, P., & Usai, M. C. (2015). 
Improving executive function in childhood: Evaluation 
of a training intervention for 5-year-old children. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1-14. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2015.00525 

United Nations. (2014). 
Committee on the rights of 
the child. Retrieved from 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/
Treaties/CRC/Shared%20Documents/VAT/
CRC_C_VAT_CO_2_16302_E.pdf 

United States Department of Health and Human 
Services. (2019). Child Maltreatment 2017. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/resource/child-
maltreatment-2017 

United States Department of Health and Human 
Services. (2015). Head Start program facts fiscal year 
2013. Retrieved from 
http://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/
hslc/data/factsheets/docs/hs-program-fact-
sheet-2013.pdf 


Valente, S. M. (2005). Sexual abuse of boys. Journal 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing, 18, 10–16. 
doi:10.1111/j.1744-6171.2005.00005.x 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. 
Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 

Wellman, H.M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-
analysis of theory of mind development: The truth 
about false belief. 
Child Development, 72(3), 655-684. 


Wellman, H. M., Fang, F., Liu, D., Zhu, L, & Liu, L. 
(2006). Scaling theory of mind understandings in 
Chinese children. Psychological Science, 17, 1075-1081. 


White House Press Secretary. (2014). Fact Sheet: 
Invest in US: The White House Summit on Early 
Childhood Education. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/
2014/12/10/fact-sheet-invest-us-white-house-
summit-early-childhood-education 

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: 
Representation and constraining function of wrong 
beliefs in young children’s understanding of 
deception. Cognition, 13, 103–128. 

Wing, L., Gould, J., & Gillberg, C. (2011). Autism 
spectrum disorders in the DSM-5: Better or worse 
than the DSM IV? 
Research in Developmental 
Disabilities, 32, 768–773. 


Wu, X., Tao, S., Rutayisirel, E., Chen, Y., Huang, K., & 
Tao, F. (2017). The relationship between screen time, 
nighttime sleep duration, and behavioral problems in 


preschool children in China. European Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 26, 541– 548. 

Yoo, J., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2012). Phonological 
memory in bilinguals and monolinguals. Memory & 
Cognition, 40, 1314– 1330. 

Zachry, A. (2013). 
6 Types of Preschool 
Programs. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.parents.com/
toddlers-preschoolers/starting – 
preschool/
preparing/types-of-preschool-programs/ 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 4 from Lifespan Development: 
A Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha 
Lally and Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 
unported license. 


Chapter 14: Cognitive 
Development in Early 
Childhood 

Chapter 14 Learning Objectives 

Describe Piaget’s preoperational stage and the 
characteristics of preoperational thought 
Summarize the challenges to Piaget’s theory 
Describe Vygotsky’s theory of cognitive 
development 
Describe Information processing research on 
attention and memory 
Describe the views of the neo-Piagetians 
Describe theory-theory and the development of 
theory of mind 
Describe the developmental changes in language 
Describe the various types of early childhood 
education 
Describe the characteristics of autism 


Early childhood is a time of pretending, blending fact and fiction, 
and learning to think of the world using language. As young children 
move away from needing to touch, feel, and hear about the world, 


they begin learning basic principles about how the world works. 
Concepts such as tomorrow, time, size, distance and fact vs. fiction 
are not easy to grasp at this age, but these tasks are all part of 
cognitive development during early childhood. 

Piaget’s Preoperational Stage 

Piaget’s stage that coincides with early childhood is the 
preoperational stage. According to Piaget, this stage occurs from 
the age of 2 to 7 years. In the preoperational stage, children use 
symbols to represent words, images, and ideas, which is why 
children in this stage engage in pretend play. A child’s arms might 
become airplane wings as she zooms around the room, or a child 
with a stick might become a brave knight with a sword. Children 
also begin to use language in the preoperational stage, but they 
cannot understand adult logic or mentally manipulate information. 
The term operational refers to logical manipulation of information, 
so children at this stage are considered pre-operational. Children’s 
logic is based on their own personal knowledge of the world so far, 
rather than on conventional knowledge. 

The preoperational period is divided into two stages: The symbolic 
function substage occurs between 2 and 4 years of age and is 
characterized by the child being able to mentally represent an 
object that is not present and a dependence on perception in 
problem-solving. The intuitive thought substage, lasting from 4 to 7 
years, is marked by greater dependence on intuitive thinking rather 
than just perception (Thomas, 1979). This implies that children think 
automatically without using evidence. At this stage, children ask 
many questions as they attempt to understand the world around 
them using immature reasoning. Let us examine some of Piaget’s 
assertions about children’s cognitive abilities at this age. 

Pretend Play: Pretending is a favorite activity at this time. A toy has 


qualities beyond the way it was designed to function and can now 
be used to stand for a character or object unlike anything originally 
intended. A teddy bear, for example, can be a baby or the queen of 
a faraway land. Piaget believed that children’s pretend play helped 
children solidify new schemata they were developing cognitively. 
This play, then, reflected changes in their conceptions or thoughts. 
However, children also learn as they pretend and experiment. Their 
play does not simply represent what they have learned (Berk, 2007). 

Egocentrism: Egocentrism 
in early childhood 
refers to the 
tendency of young children not to be able to take the perspective 
of others, and instead the child thinks that everyone sees, thinks, 
and feels just as they do. Egocentric children are not able to infer 
the perspective of other people and instead attribute their own 
perspective to situations. For example, ten-year-old Keiko’s 
birthday is coming up, so her mom takes 3-year-old Kenny to the 
toy store to choose a present for his sister. He selects an Iron Man 
action figure for her, thinking that if he likes the toy, his sister will 
too. 


Piaget’s classic experiment on egocentrism involved showing 
children a three-dimensional model of a mountain and asking them 
to describe what a doll that is looking at the mountain from a 
different angle might see (see Figure 4.9). Children tend to choose a 
picture that represents their own, rather than the doll’s view. By age 
7 children are less self-centered. 

Figure 4.9 

However, even younger children when speaking to others tend to 
use different sentence structures and vocabulary when addressing 
a younger child or an older adult. This indicates some awareness of 
the views of others. 

Conservation Errors: Conservation 
refers to the ability to recognize 
that moving or rearranging matter does not change 
the quantity. 
Using Kenny and Keiko again, dad gave a slice of pizza to 10-year-
old Keiko and another slice to 3-year-old Kenny. Kenny’s pizza slice 
was cut into five pieces, so Kenny told his sister that he got more 


pizza than she did. Kenny did not understand that cutting the pizza 
into smaller pieces did not increase the overall amount. This was 
because Kenny exhibited centration or focused on only one 
characteristic of an object to the exclusion of others. Kenny focused 
on the five pieces of pizza to his sister’s one piece even though 
the total amount was the same. Keiko was able to consider several 
characteristics of an object than just one. Because children have not 
developed this understanding of conservation, they cannot perform 
mental operations. 


The classic Piagetian experiment associated with conservation 
involves liquid (Crain, 2005). As seen in Figure 4.10, the child is 
shown two glasses (as shown in a) which are filled to the same level 
and asked if they have the same amount. 
Usually, the child agrees 
they have the same amount. 

Figure 4.10 

The experimenter then pours the liquid in one glass to a taller and 
thinner glass (as shown in b). The child is again asked if the two 
glasses have the same amount of liquid. The preoperational child 
will typically say 
the taller glass now has more liquid because it is 


taller (as shown in c). The child has centered on the height of the 
glass and fails to conserve. 


Classification Errors: Preoperational children have difficulty 
understanding that an object can be classified in more than one way. 
For example, if shown three white buttons and four black buttons 
and asked whether there are more black buttons or buttons, the 
child is likely to respond that there are more black buttons. They do 
not consider the general class of buttons. Because young children 
lack these general classes, their reasoning is typically transductive, 
that is, making faulty inferences from one specific example to 
another. For example, Piaget’s daughter Lucienne stated she had not 
had her nap, therefore it was not afternoon. She did not understand 
that the afternoon is a time period and her nap was just one of many 
events that occurred in the afternoon (Crain, 2005). As the child’s 
vocabulary improves and more schemata are developed, the ability 
to classify objects improves. 

Animism: 
Animism 
refers to attributing life-like qualities to objects. 
The cup is alive, the chair that falls down and hits the child’s ankle 
is mean, and the toys need to stay home because they are tired. 
Cartoons frequently show objects that appear alive and take on 
lifelike qualities. 

Young children do seem to think that objects that move may be 
alive, but after age three, they seldom refer to objects as being alive 
(Berk, 2007). 

Critique of Piaget: 
Similar to the critique of the sensorimotor 
period, several psychologists have attempted to show that Piaget 
also underestimated the intellectual capabilities of the 
preoperational child. For example, children’s specific experiences 
can influence when they are able to conserve. Children of pottery 
makers in Mexican villages know that reshaping clay does not 
change the amount of clay at much younger ages than children 
who do not have similar experiences (Price-Williams, Gordon, & 


Ramirez, 1969). Crain (2005) indicated that preoperational children 
can think rationally on mathematical and scientific tasks, and they 
are 
not as egocentric as Piaget implied. Research on Theory of Mind 
(discussed later in the chapter) has demonstrated that children 
overcome egocentrism by 4 or 5 years of age, which is sooner than 
Piaget 
indicated. 

Vygotsky’s Sociocultural Theory of Cognitive 
Development 

Lev Vygotsky (1896-1934) was a Russian psychologist who argued 
that culture has a major impact on a child’s cognitive development. 
Piaget and Gesell believed development stemmed directly from the 
child, and although Vygotsky acknowledged intrinsic development, 
he argued that it is the language, writings, and concepts arising from 
the culture that elicit the highest level of cognitive thinking (Crain, 
2005). He believed that social interactions with adults and more 
learned peers can facilitate a child’s potential for learning. 


Without this interpersonal instruction, he believed children’s minds 
would not advance very far as their knowledge would be based 
only on their own discoveries. Some of Vygotsky’s key concepts are 
described below. 

Zone of Proximal Development and Scaffolding: Vygotsky’s best-
known concept is the zone of proximal development (ZPD). 
Vygotsky stated that children should be taught in the ZPD, which 
occurs when they can almost perform a task, but not quite on their 
own without assistance. With the right kind of teaching, however, 
they can accomplish it successfully. A good teacher identifies a 
child’s ZPD and helps the child stretch beyond it. Then the adult 
(teacher) gradually withdraws support until the child can then 
perform the task unaided. Researchers have applied the metaphor 
of scaffolds (the temporary platforms on which construction 
workers stand) to this way of teaching. Scaffolding is the temporary 
support that parents or teachers give a child to do a task. 



Private Speech: 
Do you ever talk to yourself? Why? Chances are, 
this occurs when you are struggling with a problem, trying to 
remember something or feel very emotional about a situation. 
Children talk to themselves too. Piaget interpreted this as 
egocentric speech or speech that is focused on the child and does 
not include another’s point of view. 

Vygotsky, however, believed that children talk to themselves in 
order to solve problems or clarify thoughts. As children learn to 
think in words, they do so aloud before eventually closing their lips 
and engaging in private speech or inner speech. 

Thinking out loud eventually becomes thought accompanied by 
internal speech and talking to oneself becomes a practice only 
engaged in when we are trying to learn something or remember 
something. This inner speech is not as elaborate as the speech we 
use when communicating with others (Vygotsky, 1962). 


Contrast with Piaget: 
Piaget was highly critical of teacher-directed 
instruction believing that teachers who take control of the child’s 
learning place the child into a passive role (Crain, 2005). Further, 


teachers may present abstract ideas without the child’s true 
understanding, and instead, they just repeat back what they heard. 
Piaget believed children must be given opportunities to discover 
concepts on their own. As previously stated, Vygotsky did not 
believe children could reach a higher cognitive level without 
instruction from more learned individuals. Who is correct? Both 
theories certainly contribute to our understanding of how children 
learn. 

Information Processing 

Information processing researchers have focused on several issues 
in cognitive development for this age group, including 
improvements in attention skills, changes in the capacity and the 
emergence of executive functions in working memory. Additionally, 
in early childhood memory strategies, memory accuracy, and 
autobiographical memory emerge. Early childhood is seen by many 
researchers as a crucial time period in memory development 
(Posner & Rothbart, 2007). 

Attention 

Changes in attention have been described by many as the key to 
changes in human memory (Nelson & Fivush, 2004; Posner & 
Rothbart, 2007). However, attention is not a unified function; it 
is comprised of sub-processes. The ability to switch our focus 
between tasks or external stimuli is called divided attention or 
multitasking. This is separate from our ability to focus on a single 
task or stimulus while ignoring distracting information, called 
selective attention. Different from these is sustained attention, or 
the ability to stay on task for long periods of time. Moreover, we also 


have attention processes that influence our behavior and enable us 
to inhibit a habitual or dominant response and others that enable us 
to distract ourselves when upset or frustrated. 

Divided Attention: 
Young children (age 3-4) have considerable 
difficulties in dividing their attention between two tasks, and often 
perform at levels equivalent to our closest relative, the chimpanzee, 
but by age five they have surpassed the chimp (Hermann, Misch, 
Hernandez-Lloreda 
& Tomasello, 2015; Hermann & Tomasello, 2015). 
Despite these improvements, 5-year- 
olds 
continue to perform 
below the level of school-age children, adolescents, and adults. 

Selective Attention: Children’s ability with selective attention tasks 
improves as they age. However, this ability is also greatly influenced 
by the child’s temperament (Rothbart & Rueda, 2005), the 
complexity of the stimulus or task (Porporino, Shore, Iarocci & 
Burack, 2004), and along with whether the stimuli are visual or 


auditory (Guy, Rogers & Cornish, 2013). Guy et al. found that 
children’s ability to selectively attend to visual 
information 
outpaced that of auditory stimuli. This may explain why young 
children are not able to hear the voice of the teacher over the 
cacophony of sounds in the typical preschool classroom (Jones, 
Moore & Amitay, 2015). Jones and his colleagues found that 4 to 
7-year-olds could not filter out background noise, especially when 
its frequencies were close in sound to the target sound. In 
comparison, 8 to 11-year-old older children often performed 
similarly to adults. 


Sustained Attention: 
Most measures of sustained attention 
typically ask children to spend several minutes focusing on one 
task, while waiting for an infrequent event, while there are multiple 
distractors for several minutes. 
Berwid, 
Curko-Kera, Marks and 
Halperin (2005) asked children between the ages of 3 and 7 to push 
a button whenever a “target” image was displayed, but they had 
to refrain from pushing the button when a non-target image was 
shown. The younger the child, the more difficulty he or she had 
maintaining their attention. 

Memory 

Based on studies of adults, people with amnesia, and neurological 
research on memory, researchers have proposed several “types” of 
memory (see Figure 4.14). 
Sensory memory 
(also called the 
sensory 
register) is 
the first stage of the memory system, and it stores 
sensory input in its raw form for a very brief duration; essentially 
long enough for the brain to register and start processing the 
information. Studies of auditory sensory memory have found that 
the sensory memory trace for the characteristics of a tone last 
about one second in 2-year-olds, two seconds in 3-year-olds, more 
than two seconds in 4-year-olds and three to five seconds in 


6-year-olds (Glass, Sachse, & 
vob 
Suchodoletz, 2008). Other 
researchers have found that young children hold sounds for a 
shorter duration than do older children and adults, and that this 
deficit is not due to attentional differences between these age 
groups but reflect differences in the performance of the sensory 
memory system (Gomes et al., 
1999). 

Figure 4.14 

The second stage of the memory system is called 
short-
term 
or 
working memory. Working memory is 
the component of 
memory in which current conscious mental activity occurs. 

Working memory often requires conscious effort and adequate use 
of attention to function effectively. As you read earlier, children in 
this age group struggle with many aspects of attention, and this 
greatly diminishes their ability to consciously juggle several pieces 
of information in memory. The capacity of working memory, that is 
the amount of information someone can hold in consciousness, is 
smaller in young children than in older children and adults (Galotti, 
2018). The typical adult and teenager can hold a 7-digit number 
active in their short- term memory. The typical 5-year-old can hold 
only a 4-digit number active. This means that the more complex a 
mental task is, the less efficient a younger child will be in paying 


attention to, and actively processing, the information in order to 
complete the task. 

Changes in attention and the working memory system also involve 
changes in executive function. Executive function (EF) refers to 
self-regulatory processes, such as the ability to inhibit behavior 
or cognitive flexibility, that enable adaptive responses to new 
situations or to reach a specific goal. Executive function skills 
gradually emerge during early childhood and continue to develop 
throughout childhood and adolescence. Like many cognitive 
changes, brain maturation, especially the prefrontal cortex, along 
with experience influence the development of executive function 
skills. Children show higher executive function skills when parents 
are warm and responsive, use scaffolding when the child is trying to 
solve a problem and provide cognitively stimulating environments 
(Fay-Stammbach, Hawes & Meredith, 2014). 
For instance, 
scaffolding was positively correlated with greater cognitive 
flexibility at age two and inhibitory control at age four (Bibok, 
Carpendale & Müller, 2009). 

Older children and adults use mental strategies to aid their memory 
performance. For instance, simple rote rehearsal may be used to 
commit information to memory. Young children often do not 
rehearse unless reminded to do so, and when they do rehearse, they 
often fail to use clustering rehearsal. In 
clustering rehearsal, 
the 
person rehearses previous material while adding in additional 
information. 
If 
a list of words is read out loud to you, you are likely 
to rehearse each word as you hear it along with any previous words 
you were given. Young children will repeat each word they hear, 
but often fail to repeat the prior words in the list. 
In 
Schneider, 
Kron-Sperl and 
Hunnerkopf’s 
(2009) longitudinal study of 102 
kindergarten children, the majority of children used no strategy to 
remember information, a finding that was consistent with previous 
research. As a result, their memory performance was poor when 
compared to 
their abilities as they aged and started to use more 
effective memory 
strategies. 


The third component in memory is long-term memory, which is 
also known as a permanent memory. A basic division of long-term 
memory is between declarative and non-declarative memory. 
Declarative memories, sometimes referred to as explicit memories, 
are memories for facts or events that we can consciously recollect. 
Non-declarative memories, sometimes referred to as implicit 
memories, are typically automated skills that do not require 
conscious recollection. Remembering that you have an exam next 
week would be an example of a declarative memory. 
In contrast, 
knowing how to walk so you can get to the classroom or how to hold 
a pencil to write would be examples of non-declarative memories. 
Declarative memory is further divided into semantic and episodic 
memory. Semantic memories are memories for facts and knowledge 
that are not tied to a timeline, while episodic memories are tied to 
specific events in time. 

Neo-Piagetians 

A component of episodic memory is autobiographical memory, or 
our personal narrative. As you may recall in Chapter 3, the concept 
of infantile amnesia was introduced. Adults rarely remember events 
from the first few years of life. In other words, we lack 
autobiographical memories from our experiences as an infant, 
toddler and very young preschooler. Several factors contribute to 
the emergence of autobiographical memory, including brain 
maturation, improvements in language, opportunities to talk about 
experiences with parents and others, the development of theory 
of mind, and a representation of “self” (Nelson & Fivush, 2004). 
Two-year-olds do remember fragments of personal experiences, 
but these are rarely coherent accounts of past events (Nelson & 
Ross, 1980). Between 2 and 2 ½ years of age children can provide 
more information about past experiences. However, these 
recollections require considerable prodding by adults (Nelson & 


Fivush, 2004). Over the next few years, children will form more 
detailed autobiographical memories and engage in more reflection 
of the past. 

As previously discussed, Piaget’s theory has been criticized on many 
fronts, and updates to reflect more current research have been 
provided by the Neo-Piagetians, or those theorists who provide 
“new” interpretations of Piaget’s theory. Morra, Gobbo, Marini and 
Sheese (2008) reviewed Neo-Piagetian theories, which were first 
presented in the 1970s, and identified how these “new” theories 
combined Piagetian concepts with those found in Information 
Processing. Similar to Piaget’s theory, Neo-Piagetian theories 
believe in constructivism, assume cognitive development can be 


that aspects of information processing change the complexity of 
each stage, not logic as determined by Piaget. 
separated into different stages with qualitatively different 
characteristics, and advocate that children’s thinking becomes more 
complex in advanced stages. Unlike Piaget, Neo-Piagetians believe 

Neo-Piagetians 
propose that working memory capacity is affected 
by biological maturation, and therefore restricts young children’s 
ability to acquire complex thinking and reasoning skills. 

Increases in working memory performance and cognitive skills 
development coincide with the timing of several 
neurodevelopmental processes. These include myelination, axonal 
and synaptic pruning, changes in cerebral metabolism, and changes 
in brain activity (Morra 
et al., 2008). Myelination especially occurs 
in waves between birth and adolescence, and the degree 
of 
myelination in particular areas explains the increasing efficiency of 
certain skills. Therefore, brain maturation, which occurs in spurts, 
affects how and when cognitive skills 
develop. 

Additionally, all Neo-Piagetian theories support that experience and 
learning interact with biological maturation in shaping cognitive 
development. 

Children’s Understanding of the World 

Both Piaget and Vygotsky believed that children actively try to 
understand the world around them, referred to as constructivism. 
However, Piaget is identified as a cognitive constructivitst, which 
focuses on independent learning, while Vygotsky is a social 
constrctivist relying on social interactions for learning. More 
recently developmentalists have added to this understanding by 
examining how children organize information and develop their 
own theories about the world. 


Theory-Theory 
is 
the tendency of children to generate theories to 
explain everything they encounter. This concept implies that 
humans are naturally inclined to find reasons and generate 
explanations for why things occur. Children frequently ask question 
about what they see or hear around them. 

When the answers provided do not satisfy their curiosity or are 
too complicated for them to understand, they generate their own 
theories. In much the same way that scientists construct and revise 
their theories, children do the same with their intuitions about the 
world as they encounter new experiences (Gopnik & Wellman, 2012). 
One of the theories they start to generate in early childhood centers 
on the mental states; both their own and those of others. 


Theory of mind 
refers to 
the ability to think about other people’s 
thoughts. This mental mind reading helps humans to understand 
and predict the reactions of others, thus playing a crucial role in 
social development. One common method for determining if a child 
has reached this mental milestone is the false belief task. The 
research began with a clever experiment by Wimmer and Perner 


the age of four because of the cognitive effort it takes. Three-
have difficulty distinguishing between what they once 
thought was true and what they now know to be true. They feel 
confident that what they know now is what they have always known 
(Birch & Bloom, 2003). Even adults need to think through this task 
(
(1983), who tested whether children can pass a 
false-belief test 
(see 
Figure 4.17). The child is shown a picture story of Sally, who puts 
her ball in a basket and leaves the room. While Sally is out of the 
room, Anne comes along and takes the ball from the basket and puts 
it inside a box. The child is then asked where Sally thinks the ball is 
located when she comes back to the room. Is she going to look first 
in the box or in the basket? The right answer 
is that she will look 
in the basket, because that is where she put it and thinks it is; but 
we have to infer this false belief against our own better knowledge 
that the ball is in the box. This is very difficult for children before 
year- 
olds 
Epley, Morewedge, & 
Keysar, 2004). To be successful at solving this 
type of task the child must separate what he or she “knows” to be 
true from what someone else might “think” is 
true. 

In Piagetian terms, children must give up a tendency toward 
egocentrism. The child must also understand that what guides 
people’s actions and responses are what they believe rather than 
what is reality. In other words, people can mistakenly believe things 
that are false and will act based on this false knowledge. 
Consequently, prior to age four children are rarely successful at 
solving such a task (Wellman, Cross & Watson, 2001). 


Researchers examining the development of theory of mind have 
been concerned by the overemphasis on the mastery of false belief 


as the primary measure of whether a child has attained theory of 
mind. Two-year-olds understand the diversity of desires, yet as 
noted earlier it is not until age four or five that children grasp false 
belief, and often not until middle childhood do they understand that 
people may hide how they really feel. In part, because children in 
early childhood have difficulty hiding how they really feel. Wellman 
and his colleagues (Wellman, Fang, Liu, Zhu & Liu, 2006) suggest 
that theory of mind is comprised of a number of components, each 
with its own developmental timeline (see Table 4.2). 


Table 4.2 

Those in early childhood in the US, Australia, and Germany develop 
theory of mind in the sequence outlined in Table 4.2. Yet, Chinese 
and Iranian preschoolers acquire knowledge access before diverse 
beliefs (Shahaeian, Peterson, Slaughter & Wellman, 2011). Shahaeian 
and colleagues suggested that cultural differences in child-rearing 
may account for this reversal. Parents in collectivistic cultures, such 
as China and Iran, emphasize conformity to the family and cultural 
values, greater respect for elders, and the acquisition of knowledge 
and academic skills more than they do autonomy and social skills 
(Frank, Plunkett & Otten, 2010). This could reduce the degree of 
familial conflict of opinions expressed in the family. In contrast, 
individualistic cultures encourage children to think for themselves 
and assert their own opinion, and this could increase the risk of 
conflict in beliefs being expressed by family members. As a result, 
children in individualistic cultures would acquire insight into the 


question of diversity of belief earlier, while children in collectivistic 
cultures would acquire knowledge access earlier in the sequence. 
The role of conflict in aiding the development of theory of mind 
may account for the earlier age of onset of an understanding of false 
belief in children with siblings, especially older siblings (McAlister & 
Petersen, 2007; Perner, Ruffman & Leekman, 1994). 


Component 

Description 

Diverse-desires 

Understanding that two people may have 
different desires regarding the same object. 

Diverse-beliefs 

Understanding that two people may hold 
different beliefs about an object. 

Knowledge access 
(knowledge/
ignorance) 

Understanding that people may or may not 
have access to information. 

False belief 

Understanding that someone might hold a 
belief based on false information. 



This awareness of the existence of theory of mind is part of social 
intelligence, such as recognizing that others can think differently 
about situations. It helps us to be self-conscious or aware that 
others can think of us in different ways and it helps us to be able 
to be understanding or be empathic toward others. Moreover, this 
mind reading ability helps us to anticipate and predict people’s 
actions. The awareness of the mental states of others is important 
for communication and social skills. 

Language Development 

Vocabulary growth: A child’s vocabulary expands between the ages 
of two to six from about 200 words to over 10,000 words. This 


“vocabulary spurt” typically involves 10-20 new words per week 
and is accomplished through a process called fast-mapping. Words 
are easily learned by making connections between new words and 
concepts already known. The parts of speech that are learned 
depend on the language and what is emphasized. Children speaking 
verb-friendly languages, such as Chinese and Japanese, learn verbs 
more readily, while those speaking English tend to learn nouns more 
readily. However, those learning less verb-friendly languages, such 
as English, seem to need assistance in grammar to master the use of 
verbs (Imai et al., 2008). 

Literal meanings: Children can repeat words and phrases after 
having heard them only once or twice, but they do not always 
understand the meaning of the words or phrases. This is especially 
true of expressions or figures of speech which are taken literally. 
For example, a classroom full of preschoolers hears the teacher say, 
“Wow! That was a piece of cake!” The children began asking “Cake? 
Where is my cake? I want cake!” 

Overregularization: 
Children learn rules of grammar as they learn 
language but may apply these rules inappropriately at first. For 
instance, a child learns to add “ed” to the end of a word to indicate 
past tense. Then form a sentence such as “I goed there. I doed that.” 
This is typical at ages two and three. They will soon learn new words 
such as “went” and “did” to be used in those situations. 

The impact of training: Remember Vygotsky and the Zone of 
Proximal Development? Children can be assisted in learning 
language by others who listen attentively, model more accurate 
pronunciations and encourage elaboration. The child exclaims, “I’m 
goed there!” and 
the adult responds, “You went there? Say, ‘I went 
there.’ Where did you go?” Children may be ripe for language as 
Chomsky suggests, but active participation in helping them learn 
is important for language development as well. The process of 
scaffolding is one in which the guide provides needed assistance to 
the child as a new skill is learned. 



Bilingualism 

Although monolingual speakers often do not realize it, the majority 
of children around the world are 
Bilingual, 
meaning that they 
understand and use two languages 
(Meyers-Sutton, 2005). 

Even in the United States, which is a relatively monolingual society, 
more than 60 million people (21%) speak a language other than 
English at home (Camarota & Zeigler, 2014; Ryan, 2013). 

Children who are dual language learners are one of the fastest 
growing populations in the United States (Hammer et al., 2014). 
They make up nearly 30% of children enrolled in early childhood 
programs, like Head Start. By the time they enter school, they are 
very heterogeneous in their language and literacy skills, with some 
children showing delays in being proficient in either one or both 
languages (Hammer et al., 2014). Hoff (2018) reports language 
competency is dependent on the quantity, quality, and opportunity 
to use a language. Dual language learners may hear the same 
number of words and phrases (quantity) overall, as do monolingual 
children, but it is split between two languages (Hoff, 2018). Thus, 
in any single language they may be exposed to fewer words. They 
will show higher expressive and receptive skills in the language they 
come to hear the most. 

In addition, the quality of the languages spoken to the child may 
differ in bilingual versus monolingual families. Place and Hoff (2016) 
found that for many immigrant children in the United States, most 
of the English heard was spoken by a non-native speaker of the 
language. Finally, many children in bilingual households will 
sometimes avoid using the family’s heritage language in favor of the 
majority language (DeHouwer, 2007, Hoff, 2018). A common pattern 
in Spanish-English homes, is for the parents to speak to the child in 
Spanish, but for the child to respond in English. As a result, children 


may show little difference in the receptive skills between English 
and Spanish, but better expressive skills in English (Hoff, 2018). 

There are several studies that have documented the advantages 
of learning more than one language in childhood for cognitive 
executive function skills. Bilingual children consistently outperform 
monolinguals on measures of inhibitory control, such as ignoring 
irrelevant information (Bialystok, Martin & Viswanathan, 2005). 
Studies also reveal an advantage for bilingual children on measures 
of verbal working memory (Kaushanskaya, Gross, & Buac, 2014; Yoo 
& Kaushanskaya, 2012) and non-verbal working memory (Bialystok, 
2011). However, it has been reported that among lower SES 
populations the working memory advantage is not always found 
(Bonifacci, Giombini, Beloocchi, & Conteno, 2011). 

There is also considerable research to show that being bilingual, 
either as a child or an adult, leads to greater efficiency in the word 
learning process. Monolingual children are strongly influenced by 
the mutual-exclusivity bias, the assumption that an object has only 
a single name (Kaushanskaya, Gross, & Buac, 2014). For example, a 
child who has previously learned the word car, may be confused 
when this object is referred to as an automobile or sedan. Research 
shows that monolingual children find it easier to learn the name of 
a new object, than acquiring a 
new name for a previously labelled 
object. In contrast, bilingual children and adults show little difficulty 
with either task (Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009). This finding may be 
explained by the experience bilinguals have in translating between 
languages when referring to familiar objects. 


Preschool 

Providing universal preschool has become an important lobbying 
point for federal, state, and local leaders throughout our country. 
In his 2013 State of the Union address, President Obama called 


high-
qualityupon congress to provide high quality preschool for all children. He 
continued to support universal preschool in his legislative agenda, 
and in December 2014 the President convened state and local 
policymakers for the White House Summit on Early Education 
(White House Press Secretary, 2014). 
However, universal preschool 
covering all 
four-year 
olds 
in 
the 
country 
would require significant 
funding. Further, how effective preschools are in 
preparing 
children 
for elementary school, and what constitutes high quality preschool 
have been debated. To set criteria for designation as a 
preschool, the National Association for the Education of 
Young Children (NAEYC) identifies 10 standards (NAEYC, 2016). 
These include: 

Positive relationships among all children and adults 
are 
promoted. 
A curriculum that supports learning and development in social, 
emotional, 
physical, language, and cognitive 
areas. 
Teaching approaches that are developmentally, culturally and 
linguistically 
appropriate. 
Assessment of children’s progress to provide information on 
learning and 
development. 
The health and nutrition of children are promoted, while they 
are protected from 
illness and 
injury. 


Teachers possess the educational qualifications, knowledge, 
and commitment to promote children’s 
learning. 
Collaborative relationships with families are established 
and 
maintained. 
Relationships with agencies and institutions in the children’s 
communities are established to support the program’s 
goals. 
The indoor and outdoor physical environments are safe 
and 
well-maintained. 
Leadership and management personnel are well qualified, 
effective, and maintain licensure status with the applicable 
state 
agency. 



Parents should review preschool programs using the NAEYC criteria 
as a guide and template for asking questions that will assist them 
in choosing the best program for their child. Selecting the right 
preschool is also difficult because there are so many types of 
preschools available. Zachry (2013) identified Montessori, Waldorf, 
Reggio Emilia, High Scope, Parent Co-Ops and Bank Street as types 
of preschool programs that focus on children learning through 
discovery. 

Teachers act as guides and create activities based on the child’s 
developmental level. 

Head Start: 
For children who live in poverty, Head Start has been 
providing preschool education since 1965 when it was begun by 
President Lyndon Johnson as part of his war on poverty. It currently 
serves nearly one million children and annually costs approximately 
7.5 billion dollars (United States Department of Health and Human 
Services, 2015). However, concerns about the effectiveness of Head 
Start have 
been 
ongoing since the program 
began. 


Armor (2015) reviewed existing research on Head Start and found 
there were no lasting gains, and the average child in Head Start 
had not learned more than children who did not receive preschool 
education. 


A 2015 report evaluating the effectiveness of Head Start comes from 
the What Works Clearinghouse. The What Works Clearinghouse 
identifies research that provides reliable evidence of the 
effectiveness of programs and practices in education and is 
managed by the Institute of Education Services for the United 
States Department of Education. After reviewing 90 studies on the 
effectiveness of Head Start, only one study was deemed 
scientifically acceptable and this study showed disappointing 
results (Barshay, 2015). This study showed that 3-and 4-year-old 
children in Head Start received “potentially positive effects” on 
general reading achievement, but no noticeable effects on math 
achievement and social-emotional development. 

Nonexperimental designs are a significant problem in determining 
the effectiveness of Head Start programs because a control group 
is needed to show group differences that would demonstrate 
educational benefits. Because of ethical reasons, low-income 
children are usually provided with some type of pre-school 
programming in an alternative setting. Additionally, head Start 
programs are different depending on the location, and these 
differences include the length of the day or qualification of the 
teachers. Lastly, testing young children is difficult and strongly 
dependent on their language skills and comfort level with an 
evaluator (Barshay, 2015). 

Autism Spectrum Disorder 

A greater discussion on disorders affecting children and special 
educational services to assist them will occur in Chapter 5. 


However, because characteristics of Autism Spectrum Disorder 
must be present in the early developmental period, as established by 
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) 
(American Psychiatric Association (APA), 2013), this disorder will be 
presented here. So, what exactly is an Autism Spectrum Disorder? 

Autism spectrum disorder is probably the most misunderstood and 
puzzling of the neurodevelopmental disorders. Children with this 
disorder show signs of significant disturbances in three main areas: 
(a) deficits in social interaction, (b) deficits in communication, and 
(c) repetitive patterns of 
behavior 
or interests. 
These 
disturbances appear early in life and cause serious impairments 
in 
functioning 
(APA, 2013). The child with autism spectrum 
disorder might exhibit deficits in social interaction by not initiating 
conversations with other children or turning their head away when 
spoken to. These children do not make eye contact with others and 
seem to prefer playing alone rather than with others. In a certain 
sense, it is almost as though these individuals live in a personal and 
isolated social world which others are simply not privy to or able 
to penetrate. Communication deficits can range from a complete 
lack of speech, to one-word responses (e.g., saying “Yes” or 
“No” 
when replying to questions or statements that 
require 
additional 
elaboration), to echoed speech (e.g., parroting what another person 
says, either immediately or several hours or even days later), and 
to difficulty maintaining a conversation 
because 
of 
an 
inability 
to reciprocate others’ comments. These deficits can also include 
problems in using and understanding nonverbal cues (e.g., facial 
expressions, gestures, and postures) that facilitate normal 
communication. 


Repetitive patterns of behavior or interests can be exhibited a 
number of ways. The child 
might engage in stereotyped, repetitive 
movements (rocking, head-banging, or repeatedly dropping an 
object and then picking it up), or she 
might 
show 
great 
distress 
at 
small changes in routine or 
the 
environment. 
For example, the 
child might throw a temper tantrum if an object is not in 
its proper 



place or if a regularly-scheduled activity is rescheduled. In some 
cases, the person with autism spectrum disorder might show highly 
restricted 
and 
fixated interests that appear to be abnormal in their 
intensity. For instance, 
the child might learn and memorize every 
detail about something even though doing so serves no apparent 
purpose. Importantly, autism spectrum disorder is not the same 
thing as intellectual disability, although these two conditions can 
occur together. The DSM-5 specifies that the symptoms of autism 
spectrum disorder are not caused or explained by intellectual 
disability. 

The qualifier “spectrum” in autism 
spectrum 
disorder is used to 
indicate that individuals with 
the 
disorder can show a range, 
or 
spectrum, 
of 
symptoms 
that vary in their magnitude and 
severity: Some severe, others less severe. The previous edition of 
the DSM included a diagnosis of Asperger’s disorder, generally 
recognized as a less severe form of autistim spectrum disorder. 
Individuals diagnosed with Asperger’s disorder were described as 


having average or high intelligence and a strong vocabulary, but 
exhibiting impairments in social interaction and social 
communication, such as talking only about their special interests 
(Wing, Gould, & Gillberg, 2011). However, because research has 
failed to demonstrate that Asperger’s disorder differs from autism 
spectrum disorder, the DSM-5 does not include it. Some 
individuals 
with autism spectrum disorder, particularly those with better 
language and intellectual skills, can live and work independently as 
adults. However, most do not because the symptoms cause serious 
impairment in many aspects of life (APA, 2013). 


To determine current prevalence rates, the Autism and 
Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) Network provides 
estimates of the prevalence of autism spectrum disorders among 
8- year-old children who reside within 11 ADM sites in the United 
States, including Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, 
Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, North Carolina, Tennessee, and 
Wisconsin (Baio et al., 2018). For 2014 (most recent data), estimates 
indicated that nearly 1 in 59 children in the United States has autism 
spectrum disorder, and the disorder is 4 times more common in 
boys (1 out of 38) than girls (1 out of 152). 

Rates of 
autistim 
spectrum disorder have increased dramatically 
since the 1980s. For example, California saw an increase of 273% in 
reported cases from 1987 through 1998 (Byrd, 2002). 

Between 2000 and 2008, the rate of autism diagnoses in the United 
States increased 78% (CDC, 2012) and between 2000 and 2014 the 
rate increased 150% (Baio et al., 2018). Although it is difficult to 
interpret this increase, it is possible that the rise in prevalence 
is the result of the broadening of the diagnosis, increased efforts 
to identify cases in the community, and greater awareness and 
acceptance of the diagnosis. In addition, mental health professionals 
are now more knowledgeable about autism spectrum disorder and 
are better equipped to make the diagnosis, even in subtle cases 
(Novella, 2008). 


The exact causes of autism spectrum disorder remain unknown 
despite 
massive 
research 
efforts over the last two decades (Meek, 
Lemery-Chalfant, 
Jahromi, & Valiente, 2013). Autism 
appears 
to 
be 
strongly 
influenced 
by 
genetics, 
as 
identical 
twins 
show 
concordance 
rates 
of 
60%– 90%, whereas concordance rates 
for fraternal twins and siblings are 5%–10% (Autism Genome Project 
Consortium, 2007). Many different genes and gene mutations have 
been implicated in autism (Meek et al., 2013). Among the genes 
involved are those important in the formation of synaptic circuits 
that facilitate communication between different areas of 
the 
brain 
(Gauthier et al., 2011). A number of environmental factors are also 
thought to be associated with increased risk for autism spectrum 
disorder, at least in part, because they contribute to new mutations. 
These factors include exposure to pollutants, such as plant 
emissions and mercury, urban versus rural residence, and vitamin D 
deficiency (Kinney, Barch, Chayka, Napoleon, & Munir, 2009). 

A recent Swedish study looking at the records of over one million 
children born between 1973 and 2014 found that exposure to 
prenatal infections increased the risk for autism spectrum disorders 
(al-Haddad et al., 2019). Children born to mothers with an infection 
during pregnancy has a 79% increased risk of autism. Infections 
included: sepsis, flu, pneumonia, meningitis, encephalitis, an 
infection of the placental tissues or kidneys, or a urinary tract 
infection. One possible reason for the autism diagnosis is that the 
fetal brain is extremely vulnerable to damage from infections and 
inflammation. 
These results highlighted the importance of 
pregnant women receiving a flu vaccination and avoiding any 
infections during pregnancy. 


There is no scientific evidence that a link exists between autism and 
vaccinations (Hughes, 2007). Indeed, a recent study compared the 
vaccination histories of 256 children with autism spectrum disorder 
with that of 752 control children across three time periods during 
their first two years of life (birth to 3 months, birth to 7 months, and 
birth to 2 years) (DeStefano, Price, & Weintraub, 2013). At the time 


of the study, the children were between 6 and 13 years old, and their 
prior vaccination records were obtained. Because vaccines contain 
immunogens 

(substances that fight infections), the investigators examined 
medical records to see how many immunogens children received to 
determine if those children who received more immunogens were 
at greater risk for developing autism spectrum disorder. The results 
of this study clearly demonstrated that the quantity of immunogens 
from vaccines received during the first two years of life were not at 
all related to the development of autism spectrum disorder. 


References 

Abuhatoum, S., & Howe, N. (2013). Power in sibling conflict during 
early and middle childhood. Social Development, 22, 738- 754. 

Al-Haddad, B., Jacobsson, B., Chabra, S., Modzelewska, D., Olson, 
E……. Sengpiel, V. (2019). Long-term risk of neuropsychiatric 
disease after exposure to infection in utero. JAMA Psychiatry, 
76(6), 594-602. 

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2015). 
Gender identity 
development in children. Retrieved from 
https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-stages/ 
gradeschool/Pages/Gender-Identity-and-Gender-Confusion-
In- Children.aspx 

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2016). Media and young minds. 
Retrieved from 
https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/
138/5/e20162591 


American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5). 
Washington, DC: 
Author. 


American Psychological Association. (2019). 
Immigration. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.apa.org/advocacy/immigration 


Ariès, P. (1962). Centuries of childhood: A social history of family 
life. New York: Knopf. 

Armor, D. J. (2015). Head Start or false start. USA Today Magazine. 
Retrieved from https://www.questia.com/magazine/
1G1-429736352/head-start-or-false-start 

Autism Genome Project Consortium. (2007). Mapping autism risk 
loci using genetic linkage and chromosomal rearrangements. 
Nature Genetics, 39, 319–328. 


Baio, J., Wiggins, L., Christensen, D., Maenner, M., ……. Dowling, N. 
(2018). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among children 
aged 8 years-autism and developmental disabilities monitoring 
network, 11 sites, United States, 2014. MMWR Surveillance 
Summary, 67(No. SS-6), 1-23. doi: http://dx.doi.org/a0.15585/
mmwr.ss6706a1External 


Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: 
Freeman. 

Barshay, J. (2015). Report: Scant scientific evidence for Head Start 
programs’ effectiveness. U.S. News and World Report. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/ 2015/08/03/
report-scant-scientific-evidence-for-head-start- 
programs-
effectiveness 

Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority. 
Developmental Psychology Monograph, 4(1), part 2. 

Baumrind, D. (2013). Authoritative parenting revisited: History and 
current status. In R. E. Larzelere, A. Sheffield, & A. W. Harrist 
(Eds.). Authoritative parenting: Synthesizing nurturance and 
discipline for optimal child development (pp. 11- 34). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

Bem, S. L. (1981). Gender schema theory: A cognitive account of 
sex typing. 
Psychological Review, 88, 
354-364. Berk, L. E. 
(2007). 
Development through the life span 
(4th ed.). Boston: Allyn 
and Bacon. 

Berwid, O., Curko-Kera, E. A., Marks, D. J., & Halperin, J. M. (2005). 
Sustained attention and response inhibition in young children at 


risk for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 46(11), 1219- 1229. 

Bialystok, E. (2011). Coordination of executive functions in 
monolingual and bilingual children. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 110, 461–468. 

Bialystok, E., Martin, M.M., & Viswanathan, M. (2005). Bilingualism 
across the lifespan: The rise and fall of inhibitory control. 
International Journal of Bilingualism, 9, 103–119. 


Bibok, M.B., Carpendale, J.I.M., & Muller, U. (2009). Parental 
scaffolding and the development of executive function. New 
Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 123, 17-34. 

Bigler, R. S., & Liben, L. S. (2007). Developmental intergroup theory: 
Exploring and reducing children’s social stereotyping and 
prejudice. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 
162-166. 

Birch, S., & Bloom, P. (2003). Children are cursed: An asymmetric 
bias in mental-state attribution. 
Psychological Science, 
14(3), 
283-286. 

Blackless, M., Charuvastra, A., Derryck, A., Fausto-Sterling, A., 
Lauzanne, K., & Lee, E. (2000). How sexually dimorphic are we? 
Review and synthesis. American Journal of Human Biology, 12, 
151-166. 

Bonifacci, P., Giombini, L., Beloocchi, S., & Conteno, S. (2011). Speed 
of processing, anticipation, inhibition and working memory in 
bilinguals. Developmental Science, 14, 256–269. 

Boyse, K. & Fitgerald, K. (2010). 
Toilet training. University of 
Michigan Health System. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.med.umich.edu/yourchild/topics/toilet.htm 

Brody, G. H., Stoneman, Z., & McCoy, J. K. (1994). Forecasting sibling 
relationships in early adolescence from child temperament and 
family processes in middle childhood. 
Child development, 
65, 
771-784. 

Brown, G.L., Mangelsdork, S.C., Agathen, J.M., & Ho, M. (2008). 


Young children’s psychological selves: Convergence with maternal 
reports of child personality. Social Development, 17, 161-182. 

Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Employment characteristics of 
families-2018. Retrieved from 
https://www.bls.gov/
news.release/pdf/famee.pdf 


Bussey, K., & Bandura, A. (1999). Social cognitive theory of gender 
development and differentiation. 
Psychological Review, 106(4), 
676-713. 


Byrd, R. (2002). 
Report to the legislature on the principal findings 
from the epidemiology of autism in California: A comprehensive 
pilot study. Retrieved from 
http://www.dds.ca.gov/Autism/
MindReport.cfm 

Camarota, S. A., & Zeigler, K. (2015). 
One in five U. S. residents speaks 
foreign language at home. Retrieved from 
https://cis.org/sites/
default/files/camarota-language-15.pdf 

Carroll, J. L. (2007). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (2nd ed.). 
Belmont, CA: Thomson. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). 2000 CDC 
Growth Charts for the United States: Methods and 
Development. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
series/sr_11/sr11_246.pdf 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). Prevalence of 
autism spectrum disorders, autism and developmental disabilities 
monitoring network, 14 sites, United States, 2008. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report: Surveillance Summaries, 61(3), 1–19. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss6103.pdf 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Nutrition 
and 
health 
of young people. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/
healthyschools/nutrition/facts.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019). 
About adverse 
childhood experiences. 
Retrived 
from 
https://www.cdc.gov/
violenceprevention/childabuseandneglect/acestudy/
aboutace.html 

Chang, A., Sandhofer, C., & Brown, C. S. (2011). Gender biases in 


early number exposure to preschool-aged children. Journal of 
Language and Social Psychology, 30(4), 440-450. 


Chiong, C., & Shuler, C. (2010). 
Learning: Is there an app for that? 
Investigations of young children’s usage and learning with mobile 
devices and apps. New York: The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at 
Sesame Workshop. Retrieved from: 
https://clalliance.org/wp-
content/uploads/files/learningapps_final_110410.pdf 

Christakis, D.A. (2009). The effects of infant media usage: What do 
we know and what should we learn? Acta Paediatrica, 98, 8–16. 


Clark, J. (1994). Motor development. In V. S. Ramachandran (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of human behavior (pp. 245–255). San Diego: 
Academic Press. 


Colwell, M.J., & Lindsey, E.W. (2003). Teacher-child interactions and 
preschool children’s perceptions of self and peers. Early 
Childhood Development & Care, 173, 249-258. 

Coté, C. A., & Golbeck, S. (2007). Preschoolers’ feature placement on 
own and others’ person drawings. International Journal of Early 
Years Education, 15(3), 231-243. 

Courage, M.L., Murphy, A.N., & Goulding, S. (2010). When the 
television is on: The impact of infant-directed video on 6- and 
18-month-olds’ attention during toy play and on parent-infant 
interaction. Infant Behavior and Development, 33, 176- 188. 

Crain, W. (2005). 
Theories of development concepts and 
applications 
(5th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson. 

De Houwer, A. (2007). Parental language input patterns and 
children’s bilingual use. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, 411–422 


DeStefano, F., Price, C. S., & Weintraub, E. S. (2013). Increasing 
exposures to antibody-stimulating proteins and polysaccharides 
in vaccines is not associated with risk of autism. The Journal of 
Pediatrics, 163, 561–567. 

Dougherty, D.M., Marsh, D.M., Mathias, C.W., & Swann, A.C. (2005). 
The conceptualization of impulsivity: Bipolar disorder and 
substance abuse. Psychiatric Times, 22(8), 32-35. 


Dunn, J., & Munn, P. (1987). Development of justification in disputes 
with mother and sibling. Developmental Psychology, 23, 791-798. 

Dyer, S., & Moneta, G. B. (2006). Frequency of parallel, associative, 
and cooperative play in British children of different socio- 
economic status. 
Social Behavior and Personality, 34(5), 
587-592. 

Economist Data Team. (2017). Parents now spend twice as much 
time with their children as 50 years ago. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2017/11/27/
parents-now-spend-twice-as-much-time-with-their-children-
as- 
50-years-ago 


Epley, N., Morewedge, C. K., & Keysar, B. (2004). Perspective taking 
in children and adults: Equivalent egocentrism but differential 
correction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 
760–768. 


Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed. NY: Norton & Company. 

Evans, D. W., Gray, F. L., & Leckman, J. F. (1999). The rituals, fears 
and phobias of young children: Insights from development, 
psychopathology and neurobiology. Child Psychiatry and Human 
Development, 29(4), 261-276. doi:10.1023/A:1021392931450 

Evans, D. W. & Leckman, J. F. (2015) Origins of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder: Developmental and evolutionary perspectives. In D. 
Cicchetti and D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psychopathology 
(2nd edition). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons. doi: 10.1002/
9780470939406.ch10 

Fay-Stammbach, T., Hawes, D. J., & Meredith, P. (2014). Parenting 
influences on executive function in early childhood: A review. 
Child Development Perspectives, 8(4), 258-264. 

Felitti, V. J., Anda, R.F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, D. F., Spitz, A., 
Edwards, V., Koss, M. P., & Marks, J. S. (1998). 

Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many 
of the leading causes of death in adults: The Adverse Childhood 
Experiences (ACE) Study. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 14(4), 245-258. doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(98)00017-8 

Finkelhorn, D., Hotaling, G., Lewis, I. A., & Smith, C. (1990). Sexual 
abuse in a national survey of adult men and women: Prevalence, 


characteristics, and risk factors. Child Abuse and Neglect, 14(1), 
19-28. 

Frank, G., Plunkett, S. W., & Otten, M. P. (2010). Perceived parenting, 
self-esteem, and general self-efficacy of Iranian American 
adolescents. 
Journal of Child & Family Studies, 19, 738-746. 

Galotti, K. M. (2018). Cognitive psychology: In and out of the 
laboratory (6th 
Ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Garrett, B. (2015). 
Brain and behavior: An introduction to biological psychology (4th 
Ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Gauthier, J., Siddiqui, T. J., Huashan, P., Yokomaku, D., Hamdan, F. 
F., Champagne, N., . . . Rouleau, G.A. (2011). Truncating mutations 
in NRXN2 and NRXN1 in autism spectrum disorders and 
schizophrenia. Human Genetics, 130, 563–573. 

Gecas, V., & 
Seff, M. (1991). Families and adolescents. In A. Booth 
(Ed.), 
Contemporary families: Looking forward, looking 
back. 
Minneapolis, MN: National Council on Family Relations. 

Gentile, D.A., & Walsh, D.A. (2002). A normative study of family media 
habits. Applied Developmental Psychology, 23, 157- 178. 


Gernhardt, A., 
Rubeling, H., & Keller, H. (2015). Cultural perspectives 
on children’s tadpole drawings: At the interface between 
representation and production. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, Article 
812. 
doi: 0.3389/fpsyg.2015.00812. 

Gershoff, E. T. (2008). Report on physical punishment in the United 
States: What research tell us about its effects on 
children. 
Columbus, OH: Center for Effective Discipline. 


Glass, E., Sachse, S., & von Suchodoletz, W. (2008). Development 
of auditory sensory memory from 2 to 6 years: An MMN study. 
Journal of Neural Transmission, 115(8), 1221-1229.doi:10.1007/
s00702-008-0088-6 

Gleason, T. R. (2002). Social provisions of real and imaginary 
relationships in early childhood. Developmental Psychology, 38, 
979-992. 

Gleason, T. R., & Hohmann, L. M. (2006). Concepts of real and 


imaginary friendships in early childhood. Social Development, 15, 
128-144. 

Gleason, T. R., Sebanc, A. M., & Hartup, W. W. (2000). Imaginary 
companions of preschool children. Developmental Psychology, 
36(4), 419-428. 

Gomes, G. Sussman, E., Ritter, W., Kurtzberg, D., Vaughan, H. D. Jr., 
& Cowen, N. (1999). Electrophysiological evidence of development 
changes in the duration of auditory sensory memory. 
Developmental Psychology, 35, 294-302. 

Goodvin, R., Meyer, S. Thompson, R.A., & Hayes, R. (2008). Self-
understanding in early childhood: Associations with child 
attachment security and maternal negative affect. Attachment & 
Human Development, 10(4), 433-450. 

Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H.M. (2012). Reconstructing constructivism: 
Causal models, Bayesian learning mechanisms, and the theory 
theory. Psychological Bulletin, 138(6), 1085-1108. 

Guy, J., Rogers, M., & Cornish, K. (2013). Age-related changes in 
visual and auditory sustained attention in preschool-aged 
children. 
Child Neuropsychology, 
19(6), 601–614. Retrieved 
from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09297049.2012.710321 

Hammer C. S., Hoff, E., Uchikosh1, Y., Gillanders, C., Castro, D., & 
Sandilos, L. E. (2014). The language literacy development of young 
dual language learners: A critical review. Early Child Research 
Quarterly, 29(4), 715-733. 

Harter, S., & Pike, R. (1984). The pictorial scale of Perceived 
Competence and Social Acceptance for Young Children. Child 
Development, 55, 1969-1982. 

Harvard University. (2019). 
Center on the developing child: Toxic 
stress. 
Retrieved from 
https://developingchild.harvard.edu/
science/key-concepts/toxic-stress/ 

Herrmann, E., Misch, A., Hernandez-Lloreda, V., & Tomasello, M. 
(2015). Uniquely human self-control begins at school 


age. 
Developmental Science, 18(6), 979-993. doi:10.1111/
desc.12272. 


Herrmann, E., & Tomasello, M. (2015). Focusing and shifting 
attention in human children (homo sapiens) and chimpanzees 
(pan troglodytes). 
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 129(3), 
268–274. Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0039384 

Hoff, E. (2018). Bilingual development in children of immigrant 
families. Child Development Perspectives, 12(2), 80-86. 

Howe, N., Rinaldi, C. M., Jennings, M., & Petrakos, H. (2002). “No! 
The lambs can stay out because they got cozies”: Constructive 
and destructive sibling conflict, pretend play, and social 
understanding. Child Development, 73, 1406- 1473. 

Hughes, V. (2007). Mercury rising. 
Nature Medicine, 13, 896-897. 

Imai, M., Li, L., Haryu, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & 
Shigematsu, J. (2008). Novel noun and verb learning in Chinese, 
English, and Japanese children: Universality and language-
specificity in novel noun and verb learning. Child Development, 
79, 979-1000. 

Jarne, P., & Auld, J. R. (2006). Animals mix it up too: The distribution 
of self-fertilization among hermaphroditic animals. Evolution, 60, 
1816–1824. 

Jones, P.R., Moore, D.R., & 
Amitay, S. (2015). Development of auditory 
selective attention: Why children struggle to hear in noisy 
environments. 
Developmental Psychology, 51(3), 353–369. 
Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0038570 

Kalat, J. W. (2016). Biological Psychology (12th Ed.). Boston, MA: 
Cengage. 

Kaushanskaya, M., Gross, M., & Buac, M. (2014). Effects of classroom 
bilingualism on task-shifting, verbal memory, and word learning 
in children. Developmental Science, 17(4), 564-583. 

Kellogg, R. (1969). Handbook for Rhoda Kellogg: Child art collection. 
Washington D. C.: NCR/Microcard Editions. 

Kemple, K.M., (1995). Shyness and self-esteem in early childhood. 
Journal of Humanistic Education and Development, 33(4), 173-182. 


Kimmel, M. S. (2008). The gendered society (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Kinney, D. K., Barch, D. H., Chayka, B., Napoleon, S., & Munir, K. 
M. (2009). Environmental risk factors for autism: Do they help or 
cause de novo genetic mutations that contribute to the disorder? 
Medical Hypotheses, 74, 102–106. 

Kirkorian, H.L., Choi, K., & Pempek, T.A. (2016). Toddlers’ word 
learning from contingent and noncontingent video on touch 
screens. Child Development, 87(2), 405–413. 

Kirkorian, H.L., Pempek, T.A., & Murphy, L.A. (2009). The impact 
of background television on parent-child interaction. Child 
Development, 80, 1350-1359. 

Knorr, C. (2017). 
Gender stereotypes are messing with your 
kid. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/blog/
gender-stereotypes-are-messing-with-your-kid 

Kohn, M. L. (1977). Class and conformity. (2nd ed.). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I. Q. (2011). An introduction to brain and 
behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Worth Publishers. 

Kramer, L., & Gottman, J. M. (1992). Becoming a sibling: “With a little 
help from my friends.” Developmental Psychology, 28, 685-699. 

Lenroot, R. K., & Giedd, J. N. (2006). Brain development in children 
and adolescents: Insights from anatomical magnetic resonance 
imaging. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 718-729. 

Maccoby, E., & Jacklin, C. (1987). Gender segregation in childhood. 
Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 20, 239-287. 

MacKenzie, M. J., Nicklas, E., Waldfogel, J., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2013). 
Spanking and child development across the first decade of life. 
Pediatrics, 132(5), e1118-e1125. 

Madigan, S., Browne, D., Racine, N., Mori, C., & Tough, S. (2019). 
Association between screen time and children’s performance on a 
developmental screening test. JAMA Pediatrics, 173(3), 244-250. 

Manosevitz, M., Prentice, N. M., & Wilson, F. (1973). Individual and 
family correlates of imaginary companions in preschool children. 
Developmental Psychology, 8, 72-79. 


Martinson, F. M. (1981). Eroticism in infancy and childhood. In L. 
L. Constantine & F. M. Martinson (Eds.), Children and sex: New 
findings, new perspectives. (pp. 23-35). Boston: Little, Brown. 

Masih, V. (1978). Imaginary play companions of children. In R. 
Weizman, R. Brown, P. Levinson, & P. Taylor (Eds.). 
Piagetian 
theory and the helping profession 
(pp. 136-144). Los Angeles: 
University of Southern California Press. 

Mauro, J. (1991). The friend that only I can see: A longitudinal 
investigation of children’s imaginary companions. Dissertation, 
University of Oregon. 

Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016a). 
Nutrition for kids: Guidelines for a healthy 
diet. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/
healthy- 
lifestyle/childrens-health/in-depth/nutrition-for-
kids/art-20049335 

Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016b). 
Potty training: How to get the job done. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy- 
lifestyle/
infant-and-toddler-health/indepth/potty-training/
art-20045230 

McAlister, A. R., & Peterson, C. C. (2007). A longitudinal study of 
siblings and theory of mind development. Cognitive Development, 
22, 258-270. 

Meek, S. E., Lemery-Chalfant, K., Jahromi, L. D., & Valiente, C. (2013). 
A review of gene-environment correlations and their implications 
for autism: A conceptual model. Psychological Review, 120, 
497–521. 

Merrick, M. T., Ford, D. C., Ports, K. A., & Guinn, A. S. (2018). 
Prevalence of adverse childhood experiences from the 2011- 2014 
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System in 23 States. Early 
JAMA Pediatrics, 172(11), 1038-1044. 

Meyers-Sutton, C. (2005). 
Multiple voices: An 
introduction 
ot 
bilingualism. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. 

Middlebrooks, J. S., & Audage, N. C. (2008). The effects of childhood 
stress on health across the lifespan. (United States, Center for 


Disease Control, National Center for Injury Prevention and 
Control). Atlanta, GA. 


Mischel, W., Ayduk, O., Berman, M. G., Casey, B. J., Gotlib, I. H., 
Jonides, J., & … Shoda, Y. (2011). ‘Willpower’ over the life span: 
Decomposing self-regulation. Social Cognitive & Affective 
Neuroscience, 6(2), 252-256. doi:10.1093/scan/nsq081 

Mischel, W., Ebbesen, E. B., & Zeiss, A. R. (1972). Cognitive and 
attentional mechanisms in delay of gratification. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 204–218. 

Morra, S., Gobbo, C., Marini, Z., & Sheese, R. (2008). Cognitive 
development: Neo-Piagetian perspectives. New York: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 

National Association for the Education of Young Children. 
(2016). 
The 10 NAEYC program standards. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://families.naeyc.org/accredited-article/10-naeyc-
program-standards 

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. (2006). 
The NICHD study of early child care (NIH Pub. No. 05- 4318). 
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. 


Nelson, K., & Fivush, R. (2004). The emergence of autobiographical 
memory: A social cultural developmental theory. Psychological 
Review, 
111(2), 468-511. 


Nelson, K., & Ross, G. (1980). The generalities and specifics of long-
term memory in infants and young children. In M. Perlmutter 
(Ed.), Children’s memory: New directions in child development 
(Vol. 10, pp. 87-101). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 


Nielsen Company. (2009). 
Television audience 2008-2009. Retrieved 
from 
http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/wp-content/
uploads/2009/07/tva_2008_071709.pdf 


Novella, S. (2008). 
The increase in autism diagnoses: Two 
hypotheses 
[Web log post]. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.sciencebasedmedicine.org/the-increase-in-
autism-diagnoses-two-hypotheses/ 

Okami, P., Olmstead, R., & Abramson, P. R. (1997). Sexual experiences 


in early childhood: 18-year longitudinal data from UCLA Family 
Lifestyles Project. Journal of Sex Research, 34(4), 339-347. 

Olson, K. R., & Gülgöz, S. (2018). Early findings from the TransYouth 
Project: Gender development in transgender children. 
Child 
Development Perspectives, 12(2), 93-97. 


Parten, M. B. (1932). Social participation among preschool children. 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 27, 243-269. Perner, J., 
Ruffman, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of mind is contagious: 
You catch from your sibs. Child Development, 
65, 1228-1238. 


Pike, A., Coldwell, J., & Dunn, J. F. (2005). Sibling relationships in 
early/middle childhood: Links with individual adjustment. Journal 
of Family Psychology, 19(4), 523-532. 


Place, S., & Hoff, E. (2016). Effects and non-effects of input in 
bilingual environments on dual language skills in 2 1/2-year-olds. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19, 1023–1041. 


Porporino, M., Shore, D.I., Iarocci, G., & Burack, J.A. (2004). A 
developmental change in selective attention and global form 
perception. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 28 
(4), 358–364 doi:10.1080/01650250444000063 

Posner, M.I., & Rothbart, M.K. (2007). Research on attention 
networks as a model for the integration of psychological science. 
Annual Review in Psychology, 58, 1–23 


Price-Williams, D.R., Gordon, W., & Ramirez, M. (1969). Skill and 
conservation: A study of pottery making children. Developmental 
Psychology, 1, 
769. 


Ram, A., & Ross, H. (2008). “We got to figure it out”: Information-
sharing and siblings’ negotiations of conflicts of interest. Social 
Development, 17, 
512-527. 


Rice, F. P. (1997). Human development: A life-span approach. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Rideout, V.J., & Hamel E. (2006). 
The media family: Electronic media in the lives of infants, 
toddlers, 
preschoolers and their parents. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.kff.org/entmedia/upload/7500.pdf 


Robinson, T.N., Wilde, M.L., & Navracruz, L.C. (2001). Effects of 


reducing children’s television and video game use on aggressive 
behavior: A randomized controlled trial. Archives of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, 155, 17-23. 

Rothbart, M.K., & Rueda, M.R. (2005). The development of effortful 
control. In U. Mayr, E. Awh, & S.W. Keele (Eds.), Developing 
individuality in the human brain: A festschrift honoring Michael 
I. Posner (pp. 167–88). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association 

Ruble, D.N., Boggiano, A.K., Feldman, N.S., & Loeble, J.H. (1980). 
Developmental analysis of the role of social comparison in self-
evaluation. Developmental Psychology, 16, 105-115. 

Ruble, D. N., Martin, C., & Berenbaum, S. (2006). Gender 
development. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. 
Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, 
emotional, and personality development (6th ed., pp. 858–932). 
New York, NY: Wiley. 

Russo, F. (2016). Debate growing about how to meet the urgent 
needs of transgender kids. Scientific American Mind, 27(1), 27- 35. 

Ryan, C. (2013). Language use in the United States: 2011. Retrieved 
from https://www2.census.gov/library/publications/2013/acs/
acs-22/acs-22.pdf 

Save the Children. (2019). 
Child 
protection. 
Retrived 
from 
https://www.savethechildren.net/
what-we-do/child-protection 

Schmidt, M.E., Pempek, T.A., & Kirkorian, H.L. (2008). The effects 
of background television on the toy play behavior of very young 
children. Child Development, 79, 1137-1151. 


Schneider, W., Kron-Sperl, V., & Hunnerkopf, M. (2009). The 
development of young children’s memory strategies: Evidence 
from the Würzburg longitudinal memory study. European Journal 
of Developmental Psychology, 6(1), 70-99. 

Schwartz, I. M. (1999). Sexual activity prior to coitus initiation: A 
comparison between males and females. Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 28(1), 63-69. 

Shahaeian, A., Peterson, C. C., Slaughter, V., & Wellman, H. M. (2011). 


Culture and the sequence of steps in theory of mind development. 
Developmental Psychology, 47(5), 1239-1247. 

Singer, D., & Singer, J. (1990). The house of make-believe. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 

Smith, B. L. (2012). The case against spanking. Monitor on 
Psychology, 43(4), 60. 

Society for Research in Child Development. (2018). 
The Science is 
clear: Separating families has long-term damaging psychological 
and health consequences for children, families, and communities. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.srcd.org/policy-media/
statements-evidence 

Spears Brown, C., & Jewell, J. A. (2018). 
Gender. Retrieved 
from 
https://nobaproject.com/modules/gender 

Steele, B.F. (1986). Notes on the lasting effects of early child abuse 
throughout the life cycle. Child Abuse & Neglect 10(3), 283-291. 


Tamana, S.K., Ezeugwu, E., Chikuma, J., Lefebvre, D.L., Azad, M.B., 
Moraes, T.J.,… & Mandhane, P. J. (2019). Screen-time is associated 
with inattention problems in preschoolers: Results from the 
CHILD birth cohort study. PLOS ONE, 14(4), e0213995. Retrieved 
from https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0213995 


Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child development. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 

Traverso, L., Viterbori, P., & Usai, M. C. (2015). Improving executive 
function in childhood: Evaluation of a training intervention for 
5-year-old children. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1-14. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2015.00525 

United Nations. (2014). 
Committee on the rights of the child. 
Retrieved from 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CRC/
Shared%20Documents/VAT/CRC_C_VAT_CO_2_16302_E.pdf 

United States Department of Health and Human Services. (2019). 
Child Maltreatment 2017. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/resource/child-
maltreatment-2017 

United States Department of Health and Human Services. (2015). 


Head Start program facts fiscal year 2013. Retrieved 
from 
http://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/data/factsheets/docs/
hs-program-fact-sheet-2013.pdf 

Valente, S. M. (2005). Sexual abuse of boys. Journal of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing, 18, 10–16. doi:10.1111/
j.1744-6171.2005.00005.x 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge: M.I.T. 
Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

Wellman, H.M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of 
theory of mind development: The truth about false belief. 
Child 
Development, 72(3), 655-684. 


Wellman, H. M., Fang, F., Liu, D., Zhu, L, & Liu, L. (2006). Scaling 
theory of mind understandings in Chinese children. Psychological 
Science, 17, 1075-1081. 


White House Press Secretary. (2014). Fact Sheet: Invest in US: The 
White House Summit on Early Childhood Education. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/12/
10/fact-sheet-invest-us-white-house-summit-early-childhood-
education 

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation 
and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s 
understanding of deception. Cognition, 13, 103–128. 

Wing, L., Gould, J., & Gillberg, C. (2011). Autism spectrum disorders 
in the DSM-5: Better or worse than the DSM IV? 
Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, 32, 768–773. 


Wu, X., Tao, S., Rutayisirel, E., Chen, Y., Huang, K., & Tao, F. (2017). 
The relationship between screen time, nighttime sleep duration, 
and behavioral problems in preschool children in China. European 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 26, 541– 548. 

Yoo, J., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2012). Phonological memory in 
bilinguals and monolinguals. Memory & Cognition, 40, 1314– 1330. 

Zachry, A. (2013). 
6 Types of Preschool Programs. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.parents.com/toddlers-preschoolers/starting 
– 
preschool/preparing/types-of-preschool-programs/ 


Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 4 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 15: Psychosocial 
Development in Early 
Childhood 

Chapter 15 Learning Objectives 

Describe Erikson’s third stage of initiative vs. guilt 
Describe the changes in self-concept and self-
esteem 
Describe children’s understanding of others 
Describe emotional regulation and delayed 
gratification 
Describe young children’s understanding of 
morality 
Summarize the main theories of gender 
development 
Explain the terms transgender, gender dysphoria, 
and intersex 
Describe the major parenting styles and their 
consequences for children 
Describe the role of siblings in children’s 
development 
Summarize the types of play in which children 



engage 
Describe the influence of the media on young 
children’s social development 


Erikson: Initiative vs. Guilt 

The trust and autonomy of previous stages develop into a desire 
to take initiative or to think of ideas and initiative action (Erikson, 
1982). Children may want to build a fort with the cushions from the 
living room couch or open a lemonade stand in the driveway or 
make a zoo with their stuffed animals and issue tickets to those who 
want to come. Or they may just want to get themselves ready for 
bed without any assistance. To reinforce taking initiative, caregivers 
should offer praise for the child’s efforts and avoid being critical of 
messes or mistakes. Placing pictures of drawings on the refrigerator, 
purchasing mud pies for dinner, and admiring towers of legos will 
facilitate the child’s sense of initiative. 

Self-Concept and Self-Esteem 

Early childhood is a time of forming an initial sense of self. 
Self-
concept 
is our self-description according to various categories, 
such as our external and internal qualities. In contrast, 
self- 
esteem 
is an evaluative judgment about who we are. The emergence 
of cognitive skills in this age group results in improved perceptions 
of the self. If asked to describe yourself to others you would likely 
provide some physical descriptors, group affiliation, personality 
traits, behavioral quirks, values, and beliefs. When researchers ask 


young children the same open-ended question, the children provide 
physical descriptors, preferred activities, and favorite possessions. 
Thus, a three-year-old might describe herself as a three years-old 
girl with red hair, who likes to play with 
legos. This 
focus on external 
qualities 
is referred to as the 
categorical self. 

However, even children as young as three know there is more to 
themselves than these external characteristics. Harter and Pike 
(1984) challenged the method of measuring personality with an 
open-ended question as they felt that language limitations were 
hindering the ability of young children to express their self-
knowledge. They suggested a change to the method of measuring 
self-concept in young children, whereby researchers provide 
statements that ask whether something is true of the child (e.g., 
“I like to boss people around”, “I am grumpy most of the time”). 
Consistent with Harter and Pike’s suspicions, those in early 
childhood answer these statements in an internally consistent 
manner, especially after the age of four (Goodvin, Meyer, Thompson 
& Hayes, 2008) and often give similar responses to what others 
(parents and teachers) say about the child (Brown, Mangelsdorf, 
Agathen, & Ho, 2008; Colwell & Lindsey, 2003). 

Young children tend to have a generally positive self- image. This 
optimism is often the result of a lack of social comparison when 
making self-evaluations (Ruble, Boggiano, Feldman, & 
Loeble, 1980), 
and with comparison between what the child once could do to what 
they can do now (Kemple, 1995). 


However, this does not mean that preschool children are exempt 
from negative self-evaluations. Preschool children with insecure 
attachments to their caregivers tend to have lower self-esteem at 
age four (Goodvin et al., 2008). Maternal negative affect was 
also 
found 
by Goodwin and her colleagues to produce more 
negative self-evaluations in preschool 
children. 

Self-Control 

Self-control is not a single phenomenon but is multi-facetted. 
It 
includes response initiation, the ability to not initiate a behavior 
before you have evaluated all the information, response inhibition, 
the ability to stop a behavior that has already begun, and delayed 
gratification, the ability to hold out for a larger reward by forgoing 
a smaller immediate reward (Dougherty, Marsh, Mathias, & Swann, 
2005). It is in early childhood that we see the start of self-control, 
a process that takes many years to fully develop. In the now classic 
“Marshmallow Test” (Mischel, Ebbesen, & Zeiss, 1972) children are 
confronted with the choice of a small immediate reward (a 
marshmallow) and a larger delayed reward (more marshmallows). 


Walter Mischel and his colleagues over the years have found that 
the ability to delay gratification at the age of four predicted better 
academic performance and health later in life (Mischel, et al., 2011). 
Self- control is related to executive function, discussed earlier in 
the chapter. As executive function improves, children become less 
impulsive (Traverso, Viterbori, & Usai, 2015). 

Gender 

Another important dimension of the self is the sense of self as male 
or female. Preschool aged children become increasingly interested 
in finding out the differences between boys and girls, both 
physically and in terms of what activities are acceptable for each. 
While two-year-olds can identify some differences and learn 
whether they are boys or girls, preschoolers become more 
interested in what it means to be male or female. Gender is the 
cultural, social and psychological meanings associated with 
masculinity and feminity (Spears Brown & Jewell, 2018). A person’s 
sense of self as a member of a particular gender is known as gender 
identity. The development of gender identity appears to be due 
to an interaction among biological, social and representational 
influences (Ruble, Martin, & Berenbaum, 2006). Gender roles, or the 
expectations associated with being male or female, are learned in 
one’s culture throughout childhood and into adulthood. 


Gender socialization focuses on what young children learn about 
gender from society, including parents, peers, media, religious 
institutions, schools, and public policies. Children learn about what 
is acceptable for females and males early, and in fact, this 
socialization may even begin the moment a parent learns that a 
child is on the 
way. Knowing the sex of the child can conjure up 
images of the child’s behavior, appearance, and potential on the part 
of a parent, and this stereotyping continues to guide perception 


through life. Consider parents of newborns, shown a 7-pound, 
20-inch baby, wrapped in blue (a color designating males) describe 
the child as tough, strong, and angry when crying. Shown the same 
infant in pink (a color used in the United States for baby girls), 
these parents are likely to describe the baby as pretty, delicate, and 
frustrated when crying (Maccoby & Jacklin, 
1987). Female infants are 
held more, talked to more frequently and given direct eye contact, 
while male infant interactions are often mediated through a toy or 
activity. 


As they age, sons are given tasks that take them outside the house 
and that have to be performed only on occasion, while girls are 
more likely to be given chores inside the home, such as cleaning 
or cooking that are performed daily. Sons are encouraged to think 


for themselves when they encounter problems and daughters are 
more likely to be given assistance, even when they are working on 
an answer. Parents also talk to their children differently according 
to their gender. For example, parents talk to sons more in detail 
about science, and they discuss numbers and counting twice as 
often than with daughters (Chang, Sandhofer, & Brown, 2011). How 
are these beliefs about behaviors and expectations based on gender 
transmitted to children? 

Theories of Gender Development 

One theory of gender development in children is social learning 
theory, which argues that behavior is learned through observation, 
modeling, reinforcement, and punishment (Bandura, 1997). Children 
are rewarded and reinforced for behaving in concordance with 
gender roles that have been presented to them since birth and 
punished for breaking gender roles. In addition, social learning 
theory states that children learn many of their gender roles by 
modeling the behavior of adults and older children and, in doing 
so, develop ideas about what behaviors are 
appropriate for each 
gender. Cognitive social learning theory also emphasizes 
reinforcement, punishment, and imitation, but adds cognitive 
processes. These processes include attention, self- regulation, and 
self-efficacy. Once children learn the significance of gender, they 
regulate their own behavior based on internalized gender norms 
(Bussey & Bandura, 1999). 
Another theory is that children develop their own conceptions of 
the attributes associated with maleness or femaleness, which is 
referred to as gender schema theory (Bem, 1981). Once children 
have identified with a particular gender, they seek out information 
about gender traits, behaviors, and roles. This theory is more 
constructivist as children are actively acquiring their gender. For 


example, friends discuss what is acceptable for boys and girls, and 
popularity may be based on what is considered ideal behavior for 
their gender. 

Developmental intergroup theory states that many of our gender 
stereotypes are so strong because we emphasize gender so much 
in culture (Bigler & Liben, 2007). Developmental intergroup theory 
postulates that adults’ heavy focus on gender leads children to pay 
attention to gender as a key source of information about themselves 
and others, to seek out any possible gender differences, and to form 
rigid stereotypes based on gender that are subsequently difficult to 
change. 

Transgender Children 

Many young children do not conform to the gender roles modeled 
by the culture and even push back against assigned roles. However, 
a small percentage of children actively reject the toys, clothing, 
and anatomy of their assigned sex and state they prefer the toys, 
clothing and anatomy of the opposite sex. Approximately 0.3 
percent of the United States population identify as 
transgender 
or 
identifying with the gender opposite their natal sex 
(Olson 
& 
Gülgöz, 2018). 

Transgender adults have stated that they identified with the 
opposite gender as soon as they began talking (Russo, 2016). Some 
of these children may experience 
gender dysphoria, or 
distress 
accompanying a mismatch between one’s gender identity and 
biological sex 
(APA, 2013), while other children do not experience 
discomfort regarding their gender identity. 

Current research is now looking at those young children who 
identify as transgender and have socially transitioned. In 2013, a 
longitudinal study following 300 socially transitioned transgender 


children between the ages of 3 and 12 began (Olson & Gülgöz, 2018). 
Socially transitioned transgender children identify with the gender 
opposite than the one assigned at birth, and they change their 
appearance and pronouns to reflect their gender identity. Findings 
from the study indicated that the gender development of these 
socially transitioned children looked similar to the gender 
development of cisgender children, or those whose gender and 
sex assignment at birth matched. These socially transitioned 
transgender children exhibited similar gender preferences and 
gender identities as their gender matched peers. Further, these 
children who were living everyday according to their gender 
identity and were supported by their families, exhibited positive 
mental health. 

Some individuals who identify as transgender are intersex; that is 
born with either an absence or some combination of male and 
female reproductive organs, sex hormones, or sex chromosomes 
(Jarne & Auld, 2006). In humans, intersex individuals make up more 
than 150 million people, or 
about two percent of the world’s 
population (Blackless et al., 2000). There are dozens of intersex 
conditions, and intersex individuals demonstrate the diverse 
variations of biological sex. Some examples of intersex conditions 
include: 


Turner syndrome 
or 
the absence of, or an imperfect, second 
X 
chromosome 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
or a genetic disorder caused by 
an increased production of 
androgens 
Androgen insensitivity syndrome 
or when 
a person has one X 
and one Y 
chromosome, but is resistant to the male hormones 
or 
androgens 


Greater attention to the rights of children born intersex is occurring 
in the medical field, and intersex children and their parents should 
work closely with specialists to ensure these children develop 
positive gender identities. 


How much does gender matter for children: Starting at birth, 
children learn the social meanings of gender from adults and their 
culture. Gender roles and expectations are especially portrayed in 
children’s toys, books, commercials, video games, movies, television 
shows and music (Khorr, 2017). Therefore, when children make 
choices regarding their gender identification, expression, and 
behavior that may be contrary to gender stereotypes, it is important 
that they feel supported by the caring adults in their lives. This 
support allows children to feel valued, resilient, and develop a 
secure sense of self (American Academy of Pediatricians, 2015). 


Parenting Styles 

Relationships between parents and children continue to play a 
significant role in children’s development during early childhood. 
As children mature, parent-child relationships naturally change. 
Preschool and grade-school children are more capable, have their 
own preferences, and sometimes refuse or seek to compromise 
with parental expectations. This can lead to greater parent-child 
conflict, and how conflict is managed by parents further shapes the 
quality of parent-child relationships. 

Baumrind (1971) identified a model of parenting that focuses on the 
level of control/ expectations that parents have regarding their 
children and how warm/responsive they are. This model resulted 
in four parenting styles. In general, children develop greater 
competence and self-confidence when parents have high, but 
reasonable expectations for children’s behavior, communicate well 
with them, are warm, loving and responsive, and use reasoning, 
rather than coercion as preferred responses to children’s 
misbehavior. This kind of parenting style has been described as 
authoritative (Baumrind, 2013). Authoritative parents are supportive 
and show interest in their kids’ activities but are not 
overbearing 


and allow them to make constructive mistakes. Parents allow 
negotiation where appropriate, and consequently this type of 
parenting is considered more democratic. 


Authoritarian is the traditional model of parenting in which parents 
make the rules and children are expected to be obedient. Baumrind 
suggests that authoritarian parents tend to place maturity demands 
on their children that are unreasonably high and tend to be aloof 
and 
distant. Consequently, children reared in this way may fear 
rather than respect their parents and, because their parents do not 
allow discussion, may take out their frustrations on safer targets- 
perhaps as bullies toward peers. 


Permissive parenting involves holding expectations of children that 
are below what could be reasonably expected from them. Children 
are allowed to make their own rules and determine their own 
activities. Parents are warm and communicative but provide little 
structure for their children. Children fail to learn self-discipline and 
may feel somewhat insecure because they do not know the limits. 

Uninvolved parents are disengaged from their children. They do 
not make demands on their children and are non-responsive. These 


children can suffer in school and in their relationships with their 
peers (Gecas & Self, 1991). 

Keep in mind that most parents do not follow any model completely. 
Real people tend to fall somewhere in between these styles. 
Sometimes parenting styles change from one child to the next or 
in times when the parent has more or less time and energy for 
parenting. Parenting styles can also be affected by concerns the 
parent has in other areas of his or her life. For example, parenting 
styles tend to become more authoritarian when parents are tired 
and perhaps more authoritative when they are more energetic. 
Sometimes parents seem to change their parenting approach when 
others are around, maybe because they become more self-
conscious as parents or are concerned with giving others the 
impression that they are a “tough” parent or an “easy- going” parent. 
Additionally, parenting styles may reflect the type of parenting 
someone saw modeled while growing up. See Table 4.3 for 
Baumrind’s parenting style descriptions. 

Table 4.3 Comparison of Four Parenting Styles 

Culture: The impact of culture and class cannot be ignored when 
examining parenting styles. The model of parenting described above 


assumes that the authoritative style is the 
best 
because this style 
is designed to help the parent raise a child who is independent, 
self-reliant and responsible. These are qualities favored in 
“individualistic” cultures such as the United States, particularly by 
the middle class. However, in “collectivistic” cultures such as China 
or Korea, being obedient and compliant are favored behaviors. 
Authoritarian parenting has been used historically and reflects 
cultural need for children to do as they are told. African-American, 
Hispanic and Asian parents tend to be more authoritarian than non-
Hispanic whites. In societies where family members’ cooperation is 
necessary for survival, rearing children who are independent and 
who strive to be on their own makes no sense. However, in an 
economy based on being mobile in order to find jobs and where 
one’s earnings are based on education, raising a child to be 
independent is very important. 


In a classic study on social class and parenting styles, Kohn (1977) 
explains that parents tend to emphasize qualities that are needed 
for their own survival when parenting their children. 

Working class parents are rewarded for being obedient, reliable, and 
honest in their jobs. They are not paid to be independent or to 
question the management; rather, they move up and are considered 
good employees if they show up on time, do their work as they are 
told, and can be counted on by their employers. Consequently, these 
parents reward honesty and obedience in their children. Middle 
class parents who work as professionals are rewarded for taking 
initiative, being self-directed, and assertive in their jobs. They are 
required to get the job done without being told exactly what to do. 
They are asked to be innovative and to work independently. These 
parents encourage their children to have those qualities as well 
by rewarding independence and self-reliance. Parenting styles can 
reflect many elements of culture. 


Spanking 

Spanking is often thought of as a rite of passage for children, and 
this method of discipline continues to be endorsed by the majority 
of parents (Smith, 2012). Just how effective is spanking, however, and 
are there any negative consequences? After reviewing the research, 
Smith (2012) states “many studies have shown that physical 
punishment, including spanking, hitting and other means of causing 
pain, can lead to increased aggression, antisocial behavior, physical 
injury and mental health problems for children” (p. 60). Gershoff, 
(2008) reviewed decades of research and recommended that 
parents and caregivers make every effort to avoid physical 
punishment and called for the banning of physical discipline in all 
U.S. schools. 

In a longitudinal study that followed more than 1500 families from 
20 U.S. cities, parents’ reports of spanking were assessed at ages 
three and five (MacKenzie, Nicklas, 
Waldfogel, & Brooks-Gunn, 
2013). Measures of externalizing behavior and receptive vocabulary 
were assessed at age nine. Results indicated that those children 
who were spanked at least twice a week by their mothers scored 
2.66 points higher on a measure of aggression and rule-breaking 
than those who were never spanked. Additionally, those who were 
spanked less, still scored 
1.17 points higher than those never 
spanked. When fathers did the spanking, those spanked at least two 
times per week scored 5.7 points lower on a vocabulary test than 
those never spanked. This study revealed the negative cognitive 
effects of spanking in addition to the increase in aggressive 
behavior. 

Internationally, physical discipline is increasingly being viewed as a 
violation of children’s human rights. According to Save the Children 
(2019), 46 countries have banned the use of physical punishment, 
and the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child (2014) 


called physical punishment “legalized violence against children” and 
advocated that physical punishment be eliminated in all settings. 

Many alternatives to spanking are advocated by child development 
specialists and include: 

Praising and modeling appropriate 
behavior 
Providing time-outs for inappropriate 
behavior 
Giving 
choices 
Helping the child identify emotions and learning to calm 
down 
Ignoring small 
annoyances 
Withdrawing 
privileges 


Sibling Relationships 

Siblings spend a considerable amount of time with each other and 
offer a unique relationship that is not found with same-age peers or 
with adults. Siblings play an important role in the development of 
social skills. 


Cooperative and pretend play interactions between younger and 
older siblings can teach empathy, sharing, and cooperation (Pike, 
Coldwell, & Dunn, 2005), as well as, negotiation and conflict 
resolution (Abuhatoum & Howe, 2013). However, the quality of 
sibling relationships is often mediated by the quality of the parent-
child relationship and the psychological adjustment of the child 
(Pike et al., 2005). For instance, more negative interactions between 
siblings have been reported in families where parents had poor 
patterns of communication with their children (Brody, Stoneman, & 
McCoy, 1994). 


Children who have emotional and behavioral problems are also 
more likely to have negative interactions with their siblings. 
However, the psychological adjustment of the child can sometimes 
be a reflection of the parent-child relationship. Thus, when 
examining the quality of sibling interactions, it is often difficult to 
tease out the separate effect of adjustment from the effect of the 
parent-child relationship. 

While parents want positive interactions between their children, 
conflicts are going to arise, and some confrontations can be the 
impetus for growth in children’s social and cognitive skills. The 
sources of conflict between siblings often depend on their 
respective ages. Dunn and Munn (1987) revealed that over half of 
all sibling conflicts in early childhood were disputes about property 
rights. By middle childhood this starts shifting toward control over 
social situation, such as what games to play, disagreements about 
facts or opinions, or rude behavior (Howe, Rinaldi, Jennings, & 
Petrakos, 2002). Researchers have also found that the strategies 
children use to deal with conflict change with age, but this is also 
tempered by the nature of the conflict. Abuhatoum and Howe (2013) 
found that coercive strategies (e.g., threats) were preferred whenthe dispute centered on property rights, while reasoning was more 
likely to be used by older siblings and in disputes regarding control 
over the social situation. However, younger siblings also use 
reasoning, frequently bringing up the concern of legitimacy (e.g., 


“You’re not the 
boss”) when in conflict with an older sibling. This 
is a very common strategy used by younger siblings and is possibly 
an adaptive strategy in order for younger siblings to assert their 
autonomy (Abuhatoum 
& Howe, 2013). A number of researchers 
have found that children who can use non-coercive strategies are 
more likely to have a successful resolution, whereby a compromise 
is reached and neither child feels slighted (Ram & Ross, 
2008; 
Abuhatoum 
& Howe, 2013). Not surprisingly, friendly 
relationships with siblings often lead to more positive interactions 
with peers. The reverse is also true. A child can also learn to get 
along with a sibling, with, as the song says, “a little help from my 
friends” (Kramer & Gottman, 
1992). 


Play 

Freud saw play as a means for children to release pent-up emotions 
and to deal with emotionally distressing situations in a more secure 
environment. Vygotsky and Piaget saw play as a way of children 
developing their intellectual abilities (Dyer & Moneta, 2006). All 
three theorists saw play as providing positive outcomes for children. 
Parten (1932) observed two to five-year-old children and noted six 
types of play: Three labeled as non-social play (unoccupied, solitary, 
and onlooker) and three categorized as social play (parallel, 
associative, and cooperative). Table 4.4 describes each type of play. 


Younger children engage in non-social play more than those older; 
by age five associative and cooperative play are the most common 
forms of play (Dyer & Moneta, 2006). 


Table 4.4 Parten’s Classification of Types of Play in Preschool 
Children 


Category 

Description 

Unoccupied 
Play 

Children’s behavior seems more random and without a 
specific goal. This is the least common form of play. 

Solitary 
Play 

Children play by themselves, do not interact with others, 
nor are they engaging in similar activities as the children 
around them. 


Onlooker 
Play 

Children are observing other children playing. They may 
comment on the activities and even make suggestions but 
will not directly join the play. 


Parallel Play 

Children play alongside each other, using similar toys, but 
do not directly act with each other. 

Associative 
Play 

Children will interact with each other and share toys but 
are not working toward a common goal. 

Cooperative 
Play 

Children are interacting to achieve a common goal. 
Children may take on different tasks to reach that goal. 



An intriguing occurrence in early childhood is the emergence of 
imaginary companions. 

Researchers differ in how they define what qualifies as an imaginary 
companion. Some studies include only invisible characters that the 
child refers to in conversation or plays with for an extended period 
of time. Other researchers also include objects that the child 
personifies, such as a stuffed toy or doll, or characters the child 
impersonates every day. Estimates of the number of children who 
have imaginary companions varies greatly (from as little as 6% to 
as high as 65%) depending on what is included in the definition 
(Gleason, Sebanc, & Hartup, 2000). 

Little is known about why children create imaginary companions, 
and more than half of all companions have no obvious trigger in 
the child’s life (Masih, 1978). Imaginary companions are sometimes 
based on real people, characters from stories, or simply names 


the child has heard (Gleason, et. al., 2000). Imaginary companions 
often change over time. In their study, Gleason et al. (2000) found 
that 40% of the imaginary companions of the children they studied 
changed, such as developing superpowers, switching age, gender, 
or even dying, and 68% of the characteristics of the companion 
were acquired over time. This could reflect greater complexity in 
the child’s “creation” over time and/or a greater willingness to talk 
about their imaginary playmates. 


In addition, research suggests that contrary to the assumption that 
children with imaginary companions are compensating for poor 
social skills, several studies have found that these children are very 
sociable (Mauro, 1991; Singer & Singer, 1990; Gleason, 2002). 
However, studies have reported that children with imaginary 
companions are more likely to be first-borns or only-children 
(Masih, 1978; Gleason et al., 2000, Gleason, 2002). Although not all 
research has found a link between birth order and the incidence 
of imaginary playmates (Manosevitz, Prentice, & Wilson, 1973). 
Moreover, some studies have found little or no difference in the 
presence of imaginary companions and parental divorce (Gleason 
et al., 2000), number of people in the home, or the amount of time 
children are spending with real playmates (Masih, 1978; Gleason & 
Hohmann, 2006). 

Do children treat real friends differently? The answer appears to 
be not really. Young children view their relationship with their 
imaginary companion to be as supportive and nurturing as with 
their real friends. Gleason has suggested that this might suggest 
that children form a schema of what is a friend and use this same 
schema in their interactions with both types of friends (Gleason, et 
al., 2000; Gleason, 2002; Gleason & Hohmann, 2006). 



Children and the Media 

Children view far more television today than in the 1960s; so much 
that they have been referred to as Generation M for Media. Almost 
all American families have at least one TV set, and half own three or 
more (Nielsen Company, 2009). For children age six and under, two-
thirds watch television every day, usually for two hours (Rideout 
& Hamel, 2006). Even when involved in other activities, such as 
playing, there is often a television on nearby (Christakis, 2009; 
Kirkorian, Pempek, & Murphy, 2009). Research has consistently 
shown that too much television adversely affects children’s 
behavior, health, and achievement (Gentile & Walsh, 2002; Robinson, 
Wilde, & Navracruz, 2001). Young children are negatively 
affected 
cognitive and language development as well as be linked 
to attention problems later in childhood (Schmidt, Pempek, & 
Kirkorian, 2008; Courage, Murphy, & Goulding, 2010). 


An additional concern is the amount of screen time children are 
getting with smart mobile devices. While most parents believe that 


their young children use mobile devices for a variety of activities, 
the children report that they typically use them to play games 
(Chiong & Schuler, 2010). Studies have reported that young children 
who have two or more hours per day using mobile devices show 
more externalizing behaviors (aggression, tantrums) and inattention 
(Tamana, et al., 2019), shorter sleep duration and a higher risk of 
behavioral problems (Wu, 2017), and fail to meet developmental 
milestones in fine and gross motor skills, language, and problem-
solving (Madigan, Browne, Racine, Mori, & Tough, 2019). 

 


Based on research findings, the AAP (2016) suggests that prior to the 
age of two children should be engaged in hands-on exploration and 
social interaction with the real world, rather than the virtual one. 
The immaturity of the cognitive functions in infants and toddlers 
make it difficult for them to learn from digital media as effectively 
as they can from caregivers. For instance, it is often not until 24 
months of age that children can learn new words from live-video 
chatting (Kirkorian, Choi, & 
Pempek, 2016). Between the ages of 2 
and 5 the AAP (2016) suggests that children should be limited to no 
more than one hour per day of 
high quality 
programs that are 
co- 
viewed with a caregiver to help children to understand what they 
are viewing. The AAP also strongly suggest that parents should avoid 
using mobile media to soothe their children. The concern is that 
using media as a strategy to distract or soothe the child may make 
it difficult for parents to limit the child’s use of the devices and may 
inhibit children’s ability to self-regulate their own 
emotions. 

Child Care 

In 2018, about 71.5% of mothers of school-aged and 65.1% percent 
of mothers of preschool aged children in the United States worked 
outside the home (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). Since more 


women have been entering the workplace, there has been a concern 
that families do not spend as much time with their children. This, 
however, is not true. The Economist Data Team (2017) analyzed 
data from of ten countries (United States, Britain, Canada, France, 
Germany, Denmark, Italy, Netherlands, Slovenia and Spain) and 
estimated that the average mother spent 54 minutes a day caring for 
children in 1965, but 104 minutes in 2012. Only mothers in France 
spent last time in 2012 than in 1965. Men continue to do less than 
women at 59 minutes per day in 2012, but they provided more care 
than in 1965 when they averaged only 16 minutes a day. However, 
differences were found between working-class and middle-
class 
mothers. In 1965 mothers with and without a university 
education spent about the same amount of time on child care. By 
2012 the more educated ones were spending half an hour more 
per day. See Figure 4.27 for the difference between mothers in the 
United States who were university educated (dark blue line) and 
those who were non-university educated (light blue line). 


Figure 4.27 U.S. Mothers’ Time Spent in Child Care 


To evaluate how early child care affects children’s development, the 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (2006) 
conducted a longitudinal study. This study is considered the most 
comprehensive child care study to date, and it began in 1991 when 
the children were one month of age. The study included an 
economically and ethnically diverse group of 1364 children assessed 
from 10 sites around the country. By design the study involved single 
parents, minority backgrounds, and differing formal education 
levels. Child care was defined as “any care provided on a regular 
basis by someone other than the child’s mother” (p. 4). A regular 
basis included more than 10 hours per week. Child care 
arrangements included: Care from the father or another relative, 
care from a caregiver not related to the child in the child’s home, 
small group care in the caregiver’s home, and center-based care. 

Overall results indicated that children cared for by their mothers 
did not develop differently than those who were cared for by others. 
Parents and family characteristics were stronger predictors of child 
development than child care facilities. Specifically, greater 
cognitive, language and social competence were demonstrated 
when parents were more educated, had higher incomes, and 
provided emotionally supportive and cognitively enriched home 
environments. When comparing higher quality child care with lower 
quality child care differences were noted. 
Higher quality care, as 
measured by adult-to-child ratios, group size, and caregivers’ 
educational and training levels, resulted in higher cognitive 
performance, better language comprehension and production, and 
higher levels of school readiness. Lower quality care predicted more 
behavioral problems and poorer cognitive, language, and 
school 
readiness. 


The higher the teacher to child ratio, the more time the teacher has 
for involvement with the children and the less stressed the teacher 
may be so that the interactions can be more relaxed, stimulating 
and positive. The more children there are in a program, the less 
desirable the program as well. This is because the center may be 
more rigid in rules and structure to accommodate the large number 
of children in the facility. The physical environment should be 
colorful, stimulating, clean, and safe. The philosophy of the 
organization and the curriculum available should be child-centered, 
positive, and stimulating. Providers should be trained in early 
childhood education as well. A majority of states do not require 
training for their child care providers. While formal education is not 
required for a person to provide a warm, loving relationship to a 
child, knowledge of a child’s development is useful for addressing 
their social, emotional, and cognitive needs in an effective way. 


By working toward improving the quality of childcare and increasing 


family-friendly workplace policies, such as more flexible scheduling 
and childcare facilities at places of employment, we can 
accommodate families with smaller children and relieve parents of 
the stress sometimes associated with managing work and family life. 

Child Abuse 

The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (United States 
Department of Health and Human Services, 2013) defines Child 
Abuse and Neglect as: Any recent act or failure to act on the part 
of a parent or caretaker which results in death, serious physical or 
emotional harm, sexual abuse or exploitation; or an act or failure 
to act, which presents an imminent risk of serious harm (p. viii). 
Each state has its own definition of child abuse based on the federal 
law, and most states recognize four major types of maltreatment: 
neglect, physical abuse, psychological maltreatment, and sexual 
abuse. Each of the forms of child maltreatment may be identified 
alone, but they can occur in combination. 

Victims of Child Abuse: 
According to the United States Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS) (2019), during 2017 (the most 
recent year data has been collected) Child Protective Services (CPS) 
agencies received an estimated 4.1 million referrals for abuse 
involving approximately 7.5 million children. This is a rate of 31.8 
per 1,000 children in the national population. Professionals made 
65.7% of alleged child abuse and neglect reports, and they included 
law enforcement (18.3%), educational (19.4%) and social services 
personnel (11.7%). Nonprofessionals, such as friends, neighbors, and 
relatives, submitted 17.3% of the reports. Approximately 3.5 million 
children were the subjects of at least one report. 

Victims in their first year of life had the highest rate of victimization 
(25.3 per 1,000 children of the same age). The majority of victims 
consisted of three ethnicities: White (44.6%), Hispanic (22.3%), and 


African-American (20.7%). The greatest percentages of children 
suffered from neglect (74.9%) and physical abuse (18.3%), although 
a child may have suffered from multiple forms of maltreatment. In 
2017 an estimated 1,720 children died from abuse and neglect, and 
71.8% of all child fatalities were younger than 3 years old. Boys had 
a higher child fatality rate (2.68 per 100,000 boys), while girls died 
of abuse and neglect at a rate of 2.02 per 100,000 girls. More than 
88% of child fatalities were comprised of White (41.9%), African-
American (31.5%), and Hispanic (15.1%) victims (HHS, 2019). 

Sexual Abuse: Childhood sexual abuse is defined as any sexual 
contact between a child and an adult or a much older child. Incest 
refers to sexual contact between a child and family members. In 
each of these cases, the child is exploited by an older person 
without regard for the child’s developmental immaturity and 
inability to understand the sexual behavior (Steele, 
1986). Research 
estimates that 1 out of 4 girls and 1 out of 10 boys have been sexually 
abused (Valente, 2005). The median age for sexual abuse is 8 or 9 
years for both boys and girls (Finkelhorn, Hotaling, Lewis, & Smith, 
1990). Most boys and girls are sexually abused by a male. Although 
rates of sexual abuse are higher for girls than for boys, boys may 
be less likely to report abuse because of the cultural expectation 
that boys should be able to take care of themselves and because 
of the stigma attached to homosexual encounters (Finkelhorn 
et 
al., 1990). Girls are more likely to be abused by family member 
and boys by strangers. Sexual abuse can create feelings of self-
blame, betrayal, shame and guilt (Valente, 2005). Sexual abuse is 
particularly damaging when the perpetrator is someone the child 
trusts and may lead to depression, anxiety, problems with intimacy, 
and suicide (Valente, 2005). 


Stress on Young Children: Children experience different types of 
stressors. Normal, everyday stress can provide an opportunity for 
young children to build coping skills and poses little risk to 
development. Even more long-lasting stressful events, such as 
changing schools or losing a loved one, can be managed fairly well. 


Children who experience toxic stress or who live in extremely 
stressful situations of abuse over long periods of time can 
suffer 
long-lasting 
effects. The structures in the midbrain or limbic 
system, such as the hippocampus and amygdala, can be vulnerable 
to prolonged stress during early childhood (Middlebrooks & 
Audage, 
2008). High levels of the stress hormone cortisol can 
reduce the size of the hippocampus and affect the child’s memory 
abilities. Stress hormones can also reduce immunity to disease. The 
brain exposed to long periods of severe stress can develop a low 
threshold making the child hypersensitive to stress in the future. 


Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) 

The toxic stress that young children endure can have a significant 
impact on their later lives. According to Merrick, Ford, Ports, and 
Guinn (2018), the foundation for lifelong health and well-being is 
created in childhood, as positive experiences strengthen biological 
systems while adverse experiences can increase mortality and 
morbidity. 
All types of abuse, neglect, and other potentially 
traumatic experiences that occur before the age of 18 
are referred 
to as 
adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) 
(CDC, 2019). ACEs have 
been linked to risky behaviors, chronic health conditions, low life 
potential and early death, and as the number of ACEs increase, so 
does the risk for these results. 

Figure 4.29 



When a child experiences strong, frequent, and/or prolonged 
adversity without adequate adult support, the child’s stress 
response systems can be activated and disrupt the development 
of the brain and other organ systems (Harvard University, 2019). 
Further, ACEs can increase the risk for stress-related disease and 
cognitive impairment, well into the adult years. 
Felitti 
et al. (1998) 
found that those who had experienced four or more ACEs compared 
to those who had experienced none, had increased health risks 
for alcoholism, drug abuse, depression, suicide attempt, increase in 
smoking, poor self-rated health, more sexually transmitted diseases, 
an increase in physical inactivity and severe obesity. More ACEs 
showed an increased relationship to the presence of adult diseases 
including heart disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, skeletal 
fractures, and liver disease. Overall, those with multiple ACEs were 
likely to have multiple health risk factors later in life. 

Figure 4.30 How ACES Affect Children and Adults 


Some groups have been found to be at a greater risk for 
experiencing ACEs. Merrick et al. (2018) reviewed the results from 
the 2011-2014 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, which 
included an ACE module consisting of questions adapted from the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Each question was 
collapsed into one of the eight ACE categories: physical abuse, 
emotional abuse, sexual abuse, household mental illness, household 
substance use, household domestic violence, incarcerated 
household member, and parental separation or divorce. The results 
indicated that 25% of the sample had been exposed to three or 
more ACEs, and although ACEs were found across all demographic 
groups, those who identified as Black, multiracial, lesbian/gay/
bisexual, having less than a high school education, being low 
income, and unemployed experienced significantly higher ACE 
exposure. Assisting families and providing children with supportive 
and responsive adults can help prevent the negative effects of ACEs. 

Separating Families at the United States Border: Thousands of 


children were separated from their parents beginning in April 2018 
as they approached the United States border by Immigration and 
Custom Enforcement (ICE). Children were placed in separate 
facilities from their parents when they were being processed, and 
they were not told when they would be reunited. When enduring 
stressful situations, separation from one’s parents can be extremely 
detrimental to a child (Society for Research in Child Development 
(SRCD), 2018). Parental separations affect children’s stress 
management systems by changing how the body responds to 
stress. 
Long-term stress can disrupt brain functioning, 
cognitive 
skills, emotional processing, and physiological health. 
When exposed to stress, children typically look to their parents for 
support and care, and parents can reduce children’s stress. These 
separated children were already under extreme stress escaping 
their previous homes, and then were separated from the individuals 
who could support them through this process. 



Stress from parent separation places children at a higher risk for 
anxiety, depression, PTSD, lower IQ, obesity, impaired immune 
system functioning, and medical conditions (SRCD, 2018). Even after 
being reunited, children can experience attachment issues, poorer 
self-esteem, and physical and psychological health difficulties. As 
they age, they continue to exhibit an increased risk for mental 
health problems, problems in social interactions, difficulty with 
adult attachments, poorer stress management, and an increased 
risk for death. The American Psychological Association (2019) 
opposes policies that separate families given the negative outcomes 
suffered by children. 

References 

Abuhatoum, S., & Howe, N. (2013). Power in sibling conflict during 
early and middle childhood. Social Development, 22, 738- 754. 

Al-Haddad, B., Jacobsson, B., Chabra, S., Modzelewska, D., Olson, 
E……. Sengpiel, V. (2019). Long-term risk of neuropsychiatric 
disease after exposure to infection in utero. JAMA Psychiatry, 
76(6), 594-602. 

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2015). 
Gender identity 
development in children. Retrieved from 
https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-stages/ 
gradeschool/Pages/Gender-Identity-and-Gender-Confusion-
In- Children.aspx 

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2016). Media and young minds. 
Retrieved from 
https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/
138/5/e20162591 


American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5). 
Washington, DC: 
Author. 



American Psychological Association. (2019). 
Immigration. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.apa.org/advocacy/immigration 

Ariès, P. (1962). Centuries of childhood: A social history of family 
life. New York: Knopf. 

Armor, D. J. (2015). Head Start or false start. USA Today Magazine. 
Retrieved from https://www.questia.com/magazine/
1G1-429736352/head-start-or-false-start 

Autism Genome Project Consortium. (2007). Mapping autism risk 
loci using genetic linkage and chromosomal rearrangements. 
Nature Genetics, 39, 319–328. 


Baio, J., Wiggins, L., Christensen, D., Maenner, M., ……. Dowling, N. 
(2018). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among children 
aged 8 years-autism and developmental disabilities monitoring 
network, 11 sites, United States, 2014. MMWR Surveillance 
Summary, 67(No. SS-6), 1-23. doi: http://dx.doi.org/a0.15585/
mmwr.ss6706a1External 


Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: 
Freeman. 

Barshay, J. (2015). Report: Scant scientific evidence for Head Start 
programs’ effectiveness. U.S. News and World Report. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/ 2015/08/03/
report-scant-scientific-evidence-for-head-start- 
programs-
effectiveness 

Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority. 
Developmental Psychology Monograph, 4(1), part 2. 

Baumrind, D. (2013). Authoritative parenting revisited: History and 
current status. In R. E. Larzelere, A. Sheffield, & A. W. Harrist 
(Eds.). Authoritative parenting: Synthesizing nurturance and 
discipline for optimal child development (pp. 11- 34). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

Bem, S. L. (1981). Gender schema theory: A cognitive account of 
sex typing. 
Psychological Review, 88, 
354-364. Berk, L. E. 
(2007). 
Development through the life span 
(4th ed.). Boston: Allyn 
and Bacon. 

Berwid, O., Curko-Kera, E. A., Marks, D. J., & Halperin, J. M. (2005). 


Sustained attention and response inhibition in young children at 
risk for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 46(11), 1219- 1229. 

Bialystok, E. (2011). Coordination of executive functions in 
monolingual and bilingual children. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 110, 461–468. 

Bialystok, E., Martin, M.M., & Viswanathan, M. (2005). Bilingualism 
across the lifespan: The rise and fall of inhibitory control. 
International Journal of Bilingualism, 9, 103–119. 


Bibok, M.B., Carpendale, J.I.M., & Muller, U. (2009). Parental 
scaffolding and the development of executive function. New 
Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 123, 17-34. 

Bigler, R. S., & Liben, L. S. (2007). Developmental intergroup theory: 
Exploring and reducing children’s social stereotyping and 
prejudice. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 
162-166. 

Birch, S., & Bloom, P. (2003). Children are cursed: An asymmetric 
bias in mental-state attribution. 
Psychological Science, 
14(3), 
283-286. 

Blackless, M., Charuvastra, A., Derryck, A., Fausto-Sterling, A., 
Lauzanne, K., & Lee, E. (2000). How sexually dimorphic are we? 
Review and synthesis. American Journal of Human Biology, 12, 
151-166. 

Bonifacci, P., Giombini, L., Beloocchi, S., & Conteno, S. (2011). Speed 
of processing, anticipation, inhibition and working memory in 
bilinguals. Developmental Science, 14, 256–269. 

Boyse, K. & Fitgerald, K. (2010). 
Toilet training. University of 
Michigan Health System. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.med.umich.edu/yourchild/topics/toilet.htm 

Brody, G. H., Stoneman, Z., & McCoy, J. K. (1994). Forecasting sibling 
relationships in early adolescence from child temperament and 
family processes in middle childhood. 
Child development, 
65, 
771-784. 

Brown, G.L., Mangelsdork, S.C., Agathen, J.M., & Ho, M. (2008). 


Young children’s psychological selves: Convergence with maternal 
reports of child personality. Social Development, 17, 161-182. 

Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Employment characteristics of 
families-2018. Retrieved from 
https://www.bls.gov/
news.release/pdf/famee.pdf 


Bussey, K., & Bandura, A. (1999). Social cognitive theory of gender 
development and differentiation. 
Psychological Review, 106(4), 
676-713. 


Byrd, R. (2002). 
Report to the legislature on the principal findings 
from the epidemiology of autism in California: A comprehensive 
pilot study. Retrieved from 
http://www.dds.ca.gov/Autism/
MindReport.cfm 

Camarota, S. A., & Zeigler, K. (2015). 
One in five U. S. residents speaks 
foreign language at home. Retrieved from 
https://cis.org/sites/
default/files/camarota-language-15.pdf 

Carroll, J. L. (2007). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (2nd ed.). 
Belmont, CA: Thomson. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). 2000 CDC 
Growth Charts for the United States: Methods and 
Development. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
series/sr_11/sr11_246.pdf 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). Prevalence of 
autism spectrum disorders, autism and developmental disabilities 
monitoring network, 14 sites, United States, 2008. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report: Surveillance Summaries, 61(3), 1–19. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss6103.pdf 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Nutrition 
and 
health 
of young people. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/
healthyschools/nutrition/facts.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019). 
About adverse 
childhood experiences. 
Retrived 
from 
https://www.cdc.gov/
violenceprevention/childabuseandneglect/acestudy/
aboutace.html 

Chang, A., Sandhofer, C., & Brown, C. S. (2011). Gender biases in 


early number exposure to preschool-aged children. Journal of 
Language and Social Psychology, 30(4), 440-450. 


Chiong, C., & Shuler, C. (2010). 
Learning: Is there an app for that? 
Investigations of young children’s usage and learning with mobile 
devices and apps. New York: The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at 
Sesame Workshop. Retrieved from: 
https://clalliance.org/wp-
content/uploads/files/learningapps_final_110410.pdf 

Christakis, D.A. (2009). The effects of infant media usage: What do 
we know and what should we learn? Acta Paediatrica, 98, 8–16. 


Clark, J. (1994). Motor development. In V. S. Ramachandran (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of human behavior (pp. 245–255). San Diego: 
Academic Press. 


Colwell, M.J., & Lindsey, E.W. (2003). Teacher-child interactions and 
preschool children’s perceptions of self and peers. Early 
Childhood Development & Care, 173, 249-258. 

Coté, C. A., & Golbeck, S. (2007). Preschoolers’ feature placement on 
own and others’ person drawings. International Journal of Early 
Years Education, 15(3), 231-243. 

Courage, M.L., Murphy, A.N., & Goulding, S. (2010). When the 
television is on: The impact of infant-directed video on 6- and 
18-month-olds’ attention during toy play and on parent-infant 
interaction. Infant Behavior and Development, 33, 176- 188. 

Crain, W. (2005). 
Theories of development concepts and 
applications 
(5th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson. 

De Houwer, A. (2007). Parental language input patterns and 
children’s bilingual use. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, 411–422 


DeStefano, F., Price, C. S., & Weintraub, E. S. (2013). Increasing 
exposures to antibody-stimulating proteins and polysaccharides 
in vaccines is not associated with risk of autism. The Journal of 
Pediatrics, 163, 561–567. 

Dougherty, D.M., Marsh, D.M., Mathias, C.W., & Swann, A.C. (2005). 
The conceptualization of impulsivity: Bipolar disorder and 
substance abuse. Psychiatric Times, 22(8), 32-35. 


Dunn, J., & Munn, P. (1987). Development of justification in disputes 
with mother and sibling. Developmental Psychology, 23, 791-798. 

Dyer, S., & Moneta, G. B. (2006). Frequency of parallel, associative, 
and cooperative play in British children of different socio- 
economic status. 
Social Behavior and Personality, 34(5), 
587-592. 

Economist Data Team. (2017). Parents now spend twice as much 
time with their children as 50 years ago. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2017/11/27/
parents-now-spend-twice-as-much-time-with-their-children-
as- 
50-years-ago 


Epley, N., Morewedge, C. K., & Keysar, B. (2004). Perspective taking 
in children and adults: Equivalent egocentrism but differential 
correction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 
760–768. 


Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed. NY: Norton & Company. 

Evans, D. W., Gray, F. L., & Leckman, J. F. (1999). The rituals, fears 
and phobias of young children: Insights from development, 
psychopathology and neurobiology. Child Psychiatry and Human 
Development, 29(4), 261-276. doi:10.1023/A:1021392931450 

Evans, D. W. & Leckman, J. F. (2015) Origins of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder: Developmental and evolutionary perspectives. In D. 
Cicchetti and D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psychopathology 
(2nd edition). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons. doi: 10.1002/
9780470939406.ch10 

Fay-Stammbach, T., Hawes, D. J., & Meredith, P. (2014). Parenting 
influences on executive function in early childhood: A review. 
Child Development Perspectives, 8(4), 258-264. 

Felitti, V. J., Anda, R.F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, D. F., Spitz, A., 
Edwards, V., Koss, M. P., & Marks, J. S. (1998). 

Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many 
of the leading causes of death in adults: The Adverse Childhood 
Experiences (ACE) Study. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 14(4), 245-258. doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(98)00017-8 

Finkelhorn, D., Hotaling, G., Lewis, I. A., & Smith, C. (1990). Sexual 
abuse in a national survey of adult men and women: Prevalence, 


characteristics, and risk factors. Child Abuse and Neglect, 14(1), 
19-28. 

Frank, G., Plunkett, S. W., & Otten, M. P. (2010). Perceived parenting, 
self-esteem, and general self-efficacy of Iranian American 
adolescents. 
Journal of Child & Family Studies, 19, 738-746. 

Galotti, K. M. (2018). Cognitive psychology: In and out of the 
laboratory (6th 
Ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Garrett, B. (2015). 
Brain and behavior: An introduction to biological psychology (4th 
Ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Gauthier, J., Siddiqui, T. J., Huashan, P., Yokomaku, D., Hamdan, F. 
F., Champagne, N., . . . Rouleau, G.A. (2011). Truncating mutations 
in NRXN2 and NRXN1 in autism spectrum disorders and 
schizophrenia. Human Genetics, 130, 563–573. 

Gecas, V., & 
Seff, M. (1991). Families and adolescents. In A. Booth 
(Ed.), 
Contemporary families: Looking forward, looking 
back. 
Minneapolis, MN: National Council on Family Relations. 

Gentile, D.A., & Walsh, D.A. (2002). A normative study of family media 
habits. Applied Developmental Psychology, 23, 157- 178. 


Gernhardt, A., 
Rubeling, H., & Keller, H. (2015). Cultural perspectives 
on children’s tadpole drawings: At the interface between 
representation and production. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, Article 
812. 
doi: 0.3389/fpsyg.2015.00812. 

Gershoff, E. T. (2008). Report on physical punishment in the United 
States: What research tell us about its effects on 
children. 
Columbus, OH: Center for Effective Discipline. 


Glass, E., Sachse, S., & von Suchodoletz, W. (2008). Development 
of auditory sensory memory from 2 to 6 years: An MMN study. 
Journal of Neural Transmission, 115(8), 1221-1229.doi:10.1007/
s00702-008-0088-6 

Gleason, T. R. (2002). Social provisions of real and imaginary 
relationships in early childhood. Developmental Psychology, 38, 
979-992. 

Gleason, T. R., & Hohmann, L. M. (2006). Concepts of real and 


imaginary friendships in early childhood. Social Development, 15, 
128-144. 

Gleason, T. R., Sebanc, A. M., & Hartup, W. W. (2000). Imaginary 
companions of preschool children. Developmental Psychology, 
36(4), 419-428. 

Gomes, G. Sussman, E., Ritter, W., Kurtzberg, D., Vaughan, H. D. Jr., 
& Cowen, N. (1999). Electrophysiological evidence of development 
changes in the duration of auditory sensory memory. 
Developmental Psychology, 35, 294-302. 

Goodvin, R., Meyer, S. Thompson, R.A., & Hayes, R. (2008). Self-
understanding in early childhood: Associations with child 
attachment security and maternal negative affect. Attachment & 
Human Development, 10(4), 433-450. 

Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H.M. (2012). Reconstructing constructivism: 
Causal models, Bayesian learning mechanisms, and the theory 
theory. Psychological Bulletin, 138(6), 1085-1108. 

Guy, J., Rogers, M., & Cornish, K. (2013). Age-related changes in 
visual and auditory sustained attention in preschool-aged 
children. 
Child Neuropsychology, 
19(6), 601–614. Retrieved 
from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09297049.2012.710321 

Hammer C. S., Hoff, E., Uchikosh1, Y., Gillanders, C., Castro, D., & 
Sandilos, L. E. (2014). The language literacy development of young 
dual language learners: A critical review. Early Child Research 
Quarterly, 29(4), 715-733. 

Harter, S., & Pike, R. (1984). The pictorial scale of Perceived 
Competence and Social Acceptance for Young Children. Child 
Development, 55, 1969-1982. 

Harvard University. (2019). 
Center on the developing child: Toxic 
stress. 
Retrieved from 
https://developingchild.harvard.edu/
science/key-concepts/toxic-stress/ 

Herrmann, E., Misch, A., Hernandez-Lloreda, V., & Tomasello, M. 
(2015). Uniquely human self-control begins at school 


age. 
Developmental Science, 18(6), 979-993. doi:10.1111/
desc.12272. 


Herrmann, E., & Tomasello, M. (2015). Focusing and shifting 
attention in human children (homo sapiens) and chimpanzees 
(pan troglodytes). 
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 129(3), 
268–274. Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0039384 

Hoff, E. (2018). Bilingual development in children of immigrant 
families. Child Development Perspectives, 12(2), 80-86. 

Howe, N., Rinaldi, C. M., Jennings, M., & Petrakos, H. (2002). “No! 
The lambs can stay out because they got cozies”: Constructive 
and destructive sibling conflict, pretend play, and social 
understanding. Child Development, 73, 1406- 1473. 

Hughes, V. (2007). Mercury rising. 
Nature Medicine, 13, 896-897. 

Imai, M., Li, L., Haryu, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & 
Shigematsu, J. (2008). Novel noun and verb learning in Chinese, 
English, and Japanese children: Universality and language-
specificity in novel noun and verb learning. Child Development, 
79, 979-1000. 

Jarne, P., & Auld, J. R. (2006). Animals mix it up too: The distribution 
of self-fertilization among hermaphroditic animals. Evolution, 60, 
1816–1824. 

Jones, P.R., Moore, D.R., & 
Amitay, S. (2015). Development of auditory 
selective attention: Why children struggle to hear in noisy 
environments. 
Developmental Psychology, 51(3), 353–369. 
Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0038570 

Kalat, J. W. (2016). Biological Psychology (12th Ed.). Boston, MA: 
Cengage. 

Kaushanskaya, M., Gross, M., & Buac, M. (2014). Effects of classroom 
bilingualism on task-shifting, verbal memory, and word learning 
in children. Developmental Science, 17(4), 564-583. 

Kellogg, R. (1969). Handbook for Rhoda Kellogg: Child art collection. 
Washington D. C.: NCR/Microcard Editions. 

Kemple, K.M., (1995). Shyness and self-esteem in early childhood. 
Journal of Humanistic Education and Development, 33(4), 173-182. 


Kimmel, M. S. (2008). The gendered society (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Kinney, D. K., Barch, D. H., Chayka, B., Napoleon, S., & Munir, K. 
M. (2009). Environmental risk factors for autism: Do they help or 
cause de novo genetic mutations that contribute to the disorder? 
Medical Hypotheses, 74, 102–106. 

Kirkorian, H.L., Choi, K., & Pempek, T.A. (2016). Toddlers’ word 
learning from contingent and noncontingent video on touch 
screens. Child Development, 87(2), 405–413. 

Kirkorian, H.L., Pempek, T.A., & Murphy, L.A. (2009). The impact 
of background television on parent-child interaction. Child 
Development, 80, 1350-1359. 

Knorr, C. (2017). 
Gender stereotypes are messing with your 
kid. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/blog/
gender-stereotypes-are-messing-with-your-kid 

Kohn, M. L. (1977). Class and conformity. (2nd ed.). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I. Q. (2011). An introduction to brain and 
behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Worth Publishers. 

Kramer, L., & Gottman, J. M. (1992). Becoming a sibling: “With a little 
help from my friends.” Developmental Psychology, 28, 685-699. 

Lenroot, R. K., & Giedd, J. N. (2006). Brain development in children 
and adolescents: Insights from anatomical magnetic resonance 
imaging. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 718-729. 

Maccoby, E., & Jacklin, C. (1987). Gender segregation in childhood. 
Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 20, 239-287. 

MacKenzie, M. J., Nicklas, E., Waldfogel, J., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2013). 
Spanking and child development across the first decade of life. 
Pediatrics, 132(5), e1118-e1125. 

Madigan, S., Browne, D., Racine, N., Mori, C., & Tough, S. (2019). 
Association between screen time and children’s performance on a 
developmental screening test. JAMA Pediatrics, 173(3), 244-250. 

Manosevitz, M., Prentice, N. M., & Wilson, F. (1973). Individual and 
family correlates of imaginary companions in preschool children. 
Developmental Psychology, 8, 72-79. 


Martinson, F. M. (1981). Eroticism in infancy and childhood. In L. 
L. Constantine & F. M. Martinson (Eds.), Children and sex: New 
findings, new perspectives. (pp. 23-35). Boston: Little, Brown. 

Masih, V. (1978). Imaginary play companions of children. In R. 
Weizman, R. Brown, P. Levinson, & P. Taylor (Eds.). 
Piagetian 
theory and the helping profession 
(pp. 136-144). Los Angeles: 
University of Southern California Press. 

Mauro, J. (1991). The friend that only I can see: A longitudinal 
investigation of children’s imaginary companions. Dissertation, 
University of Oregon. 

Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016a). 
Nutrition for kids: Guidelines for a healthy 
diet. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/
healthy- 
lifestyle/childrens-health/in-depth/nutrition-for-
kids/art-20049335 

Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016b). 
Potty training: How to get the job done. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy- 
lifestyle/
infant-and-toddler-health/indepth/potty-training/
art-20045230 

McAlister, A. R., & Peterson, C. C. (2007). A longitudinal study of 
siblings and theory of mind development. Cognitive Development, 
22, 258-270. 

Meek, S. E., Lemery-Chalfant, K., Jahromi, L. D., & Valiente, C. (2013). 
A review of gene-environment correlations and their implications 
for autism: A conceptual model. Psychological Review, 120, 
497–521. 

Merrick, M. T., Ford, D. C., Ports, K. A., & Guinn, A. S. (2018). 
Prevalence of adverse childhood experiences from the 2011- 2014 
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System in 23 States. Early 
JAMA Pediatrics, 172(11), 1038-1044. 

Meyers-Sutton, C. (2005). 
Multiple voices: An 
introduction 
ot 
bilingualism. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. 

Middlebrooks, J. S., & Audage, N. C. (2008). The effects of childhood 
stress on health across the lifespan. (United States, Center for 


Disease Control, National Center for Injury Prevention and 
Control). Atlanta, GA. 


Mischel, W., Ayduk, O., Berman, M. G., Casey, B. J., Gotlib, I. H., 
Jonides, J., & … Shoda, Y. (2011). ‘Willpower’ over the life span: 
Decomposing self-regulation. Social Cognitive & Affective 
Neuroscience, 6(2), 252-256. doi:10.1093/scan/nsq081 

Mischel, W., Ebbesen, E. B., & Zeiss, A. R. (1972). Cognitive and 
attentional mechanisms in delay of gratification. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 204–218. 

Morra, S., Gobbo, C., Marini, Z., & Sheese, R. (2008). Cognitive 
development: Neo-Piagetian perspectives. New York: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 

National Association for the Education of Young Children. 
(2016). 
The 10 NAEYC program standards. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://families.naeyc.org/accredited-article/10-naeyc-
program-standards 

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. (2006). 
The NICHD study of early child care (NIH Pub. No. 05- 4318). 
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. 


Nelson, K., & Fivush, R. (2004). The emergence of autobiographical 
memory: A social cultural developmental theory. Psychological 
Review, 
111(2), 468-511. 


Nelson, K., & Ross, G. (1980). The generalities and specifics of long-
term memory in infants and young children. In M. Perlmutter 
(Ed.), Children’s memory: New directions in child development 
(Vol. 10, pp. 87-101). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 


Nielsen Company. (2009). 
Television audience 2008-2009. Retrieved 
from 
http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/wp-content/
uploads/2009/07/tva_2008_071709.pdf 


Novella, S. (2008). 
The increase in autism diagnoses: Two 
hypotheses 
[Web log post]. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.sciencebasedmedicine.org/the-increase-in-
autism-diagnoses-two-hypotheses/ 

Okami, P., Olmstead, R., & Abramson, P. R. (1997). Sexual experiences 


in early childhood: 18-year longitudinal data from UCLA Family 
Lifestyles Project. Journal of Sex Research, 34(4), 339-347. 

Olson, K. R., & Gülgöz, S. (2018). Early findings from the TransYouth 
Project: Gender development in transgender children. 
Child 
Development Perspectives, 12(2), 93-97. 


Parten, M. B. (1932). Social participation among preschool children. 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 27, 243-269. Perner, J., 
Ruffman, T., & Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of mind is contagious: 
You catch from your sibs. Child Development, 
65, 1228-1238. 


Pike, A., Coldwell, J., & Dunn, J. F. (2005). Sibling relationships in 
early/middle childhood: Links with individual adjustment. Journal 
of Family Psychology, 19(4), 523-532. 


Place, S., & Hoff, E. (2016). Effects and non-effects of input in 
bilingual environments on dual language skills in 2 1/2-year-olds. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19, 1023–1041. 


Porporino, M., Shore, D.I., Iarocci, G., & Burack, J.A. (2004). A 
developmental change in selective attention and global form 
perception. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 28 
(4), 358–364 doi:10.1080/01650250444000063 

Posner, M.I., & Rothbart, M.K. (2007). Research on attention 
networks as a model for the integration of psychological science. 
Annual Review in Psychology, 58, 1–23 


Price-Williams, D.R., Gordon, W., & Ramirez, M. (1969). Skill and 
conservation: A study of pottery making children. Developmental 
Psychology, 1, 
769. 


Ram, A., & Ross, H. (2008). “We got to figure it out”: Information-
sharing and siblings’ negotiations of conflicts of interest. Social 
Development, 17, 
512-527. 


Rice, F. P. (1997). Human development: A life-span approach. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Rideout, V.J., & Hamel E. (2006). 
The media family: Electronic media in the lives of infants, 
toddlers, 
preschoolers and their parents. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.kff.org/entmedia/upload/7500.pdf 


Robinson, T.N., Wilde, M.L., & Navracruz, L.C. (2001). Effects of 


reducing children’s television and video game use on aggressive 
behavior: A randomized controlled trial. Archives of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, 155, 17-23. 

Rothbart, M.K., & Rueda, M.R. (2005). The development of effortful 
control. In U. Mayr, E. Awh, & S.W. Keele (Eds.), Developing 
individuality in the human brain: A festschrift honoring Michael 
I. Posner (pp. 167–88). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association 

Ruble, D.N., Boggiano, A.K., Feldman, N.S., & Loeble, J.H. (1980). 
Developmental analysis of the role of social comparison in self-
evaluation. Developmental Psychology, 16, 105-115. 

Ruble, D. N., Martin, C., & Berenbaum, S. (2006). Gender 
development. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. 
Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, 
emotional, and personality development (6th ed., pp. 858–932). 
New York, NY: Wiley. 

Russo, F. (2016). Debate growing about how to meet the urgent 
needs of transgender kids. Scientific American Mind, 27(1), 27- 35. 

Ryan, C. (2013). Language use in the United States: 2011. Retrieved 
from https://www2.census.gov/library/publications/2013/acs/
acs-22/acs-22.pdf 

Save the Children. (2019). 
Child 
protection. 
Retrived 
from 
https://www.savethechildren.net/
what-we-do/child-protection 

Schmidt, M.E., Pempek, T.A., & Kirkorian, H.L. (2008). The effects 
of background television on the toy play behavior of very young 
children. Child Development, 79, 1137-1151. 


Schneider, W., Kron-Sperl, V., & Hunnerkopf, M. (2009). The 
development of young children’s memory strategies: Evidence 
from the Würzburg longitudinal memory study. European Journal 
of Developmental Psychology, 6(1), 70-99. 

Schwartz, I. M. (1999). Sexual activity prior to coitus initiation: A 
comparison between males and females. Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 28(1), 63-69. 

Shahaeian, A., Peterson, C. C., Slaughter, V., & Wellman, H. M. (2011). 


Culture and the sequence of steps in theory of mind development. 
Developmental Psychology, 47(5), 1239-1247. 

Singer, D., & Singer, J. (1990). The house of make-believe. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 

Smith, B. L. (2012). The case against spanking. Monitor on 
Psychology, 43(4), 60. 

Society for Research in Child Development. (2018). 
The Science is 
clear: Separating families has long-term damaging psychological 
and health consequences for children, families, and communities. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.srcd.org/policy-media/
statements-evidence 

Spears Brown, C., & Jewell, J. A. (2018). 
Gender. Retrieved 
from 
https://nobaproject.com/modules/gender 

Steele, B.F. (1986). Notes on the lasting effects of early child abuse 
throughout the life cycle. Child Abuse & Neglect 10(3), 283-291. 


Tamana, S.K., Ezeugwu, E., Chikuma, J., Lefebvre, D.L., Azad, M.B., 
Moraes, T.J.,… & Mandhane, P. J. (2019). Screen-time is associated 
with inattention problems in preschoolers: Results from the 
CHILD birth cohort study. PLOS ONE, 14(4), e0213995. Retrieved 
from https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0213995 


Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child development. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 

Traverso, L., Viterbori, P., & Usai, M. C. (2015). Improving executive 
function in childhood: Evaluation of a training intervention for 
5-year-old children. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1-14. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2015.00525 

United Nations. (2014). 
Committee on the rights of the child. 
Retrieved from 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CRC/
Shared%20Documents/VAT/CRC_C_VAT_CO_2_16302_E.pdf 

United States Department of Health and Human Services. (2019). 
Child Maltreatment 2017. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/resource/child-
maltreatment-2017 

United States Department of Health and Human Services. (2015). 


Head Start program facts fiscal year 2013. Retrieved 
from 
http://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/data/factsheets/docs/
hs-program-fact-sheet-2013.pdf 

Valente, S. M. (2005). Sexual abuse of boys. Journal of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing, 18, 10–16. doi:10.1111/
j.1744-6171.2005.00005.x 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge: M.I.T. 
Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

Wellman, H.M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of 
theory of mind development: The truth about false belief. 
Child 
Development, 72(3), 655-684. 


Wellman, H. M., Fang, F., Liu, D., Zhu, L, & Liu, L. (2006). Scaling 
theory of mind understandings in Chinese children. Psychological 
Science, 17, 1075-1081. 


White House Press Secretary. (2014). Fact Sheet: Invest in US: The 
White House Summit on Early Childhood Education. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/12/
10/fact-sheet-invest-us-white-house-summit-early-childhood-
education 

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation 
and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s 
understanding of deception. Cognition, 13, 103–128. 

Wing, L., Gould, J., & Gillberg, C. (2011). Autism spectrum disorders 
in the DSM-5: Better or worse than the DSM IV? 
Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, 32, 768–773. 


Wu, X., Tao, S., Rutayisirel, E., Chen, Y., Huang, K., & Tao, F. (2017). 
The relationship between screen time, nighttime sleep duration, 
and behavioral problems in preschool children in China. European 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 26, 541– 548. 

Yoo, J., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2012). Phonological memory in 
bilinguals and monolinguals. Memory & Cognition, 40, 1314– 1330. 

Zachry, A. (2013). 
6 Types of Preschool Programs. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.parents.com/toddlers-preschoolers/starting 
– 
preschool/preparing/types-of-preschool-programs/ 


Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 4 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


PART 
VIII 
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE 
CHILDHOOD 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore and connect Psychosocial, Cognitive, 
and Psychosexual Development 
Explore and connect another Theory, Approach, 
or Perspective to work in critical thinking skills for 
client assessments 
Exploring important aspects of a person’s 
experience and ability to justify why they are 
important 



Vignette 

Monty
Photo by Andrew Lancaster on 
Unsplash 

Monty is an 8 y/o boy living 
with his mother, Foley, and 
maternal grandmother, Livia, in 
a small 2 bedroom apartment in 
the city. Foley was 15 when she 
had Monty and did not finish 
high school. Both she and her 
mother Livia work different 
shifts at a factory nearby their 
apartment so one of them can be 
home to provide care for Monty. 
Monty has never met his father 
and knows little about him. 
Recently Foley has been fighting 
more with her mother about how 
Livia is becoming less patient 
with Monty and has begun 
locking him in his room when he 
is being disruptive. 

Monty has done fairly well in school until this past year. He has 
always been a high energy child but had been able to respond to his 
teachers majority of the time when redirected. Over the past several 
weeks Monty has demonstrated increased struggles with defiance, 
aggression, and fighting with his peers. Foley has been called to meet 
with the school Social Worker to discuss these concerns. 

Foley meets with the school Social Worker next and reports how 
Monty has always been a very active and impulsive child, not paying 
much attention to his surroundings or personal space of others. Foley 
describes Monty as “the Energizer bunny – he never stops, always 
running around, crashing into things and making a mess wherever 
he goes. I have a hard time getting him to listen too, and I usually 
end up spanking him to make him stop. My mom also spanks him, 


but she says it doesn’t always work so she started locking him in his 
room until he stops – we’ve been fighting more recently about this 
and I noticed he seems to be having a harder time too”. She shares 
some of their history with the Social Worker, such as being a teenage 
mother, Monty’s father never being around, and increasing struggles 
with her mother’s punishments for Monty, mainly locking him in 
his room. The Social Worker explored Foley’s thoughts on connecting 
Monty to mental health service as a support which could be provided 
at school. Foley reports feeling some anxiety with this as she does 
not know much about mental health services and fears Monty will 
simply be medicated “like a Zombie”. The Social Worker assures Foley 
this will not be the case as the focus will be how to support Monty 
with emotional and behavioral interventions, and if medication was 
something recommended, they would be able to discuss benefits vs 
possible side effects with Foley having the final say in the decision. 
Foley agrees to “give it a try, couldn’t hurt anything, could it?”. 


Critical Thinking: 

1. What stage of Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive 
Development is the client currently in? Are they 
meeting expectations of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any delays in this stage? 
Examples? 
2. What stage of Erikson’s Theory of Psychosocial 
Development are they currently in? Are they 
meeting the goals of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any struggles with their goals 
in this stage? Examples? 



3. What theory, approach, or perspective from 
previous Dimensions (PIE, Biopsychosocial, 
Sociocultural, or Social Change) would you use to 
assess this client? Why? 
4. What do you feel are the most important 
aspects (physical development, attachment, sexual 
development, etc) to consider for this client? 
Why? 


References 

Hutchinson, E. D. (2019). Dimensions of human behavior (Sixth 
edition). Sage Publications, Inc. 

 



Chapter 16: Physical 
Development in Middle 
Childhood 

Chapter 16 Learning Objectives 

Summarize the overall physical growth 
Describe the changes in brain maturation 
Describe the positive effects of sports 
Describe reasons for a lack of participation in youth 
sports 
Explain current trends regarding being overweight 
in childhood, the negative consequences of excess 
weight, the lack of recognition of being overweight, 
and interventions to normalize weight 


Overall Physical Growth: Rates of growth generally slow during 
these years. Typically, a child will gain about 5-7 pounds a year 
and grow about 2-3 inches per year (CDC, 2000). They also tend 
to slim down and gain muscle strength and lung capacity making 
it possible to engage in strenuous physical activity for long periods 
of time. The beginning of the growth spurt, which occurs prior to 
puberty, begins two years earlier for females than males. The mean 
age for the beginning of the growth spurt for girls is nine, while for 


boys it is eleven. Children of this age tend to sharpen their abilities 
to perform both gross motor skills, such as riding a bike, and fine 
motor skills, such as cutting their fingernails. In gross motor skills 
(involving large muscles) boys typically outperform girls, while with 
fine motor skills (small muscles) girls outperform the boys. These 
improvements in motor skills are related to brain growth and 
experience during this developmental period. 

Brain Growth: Two major brain growth spurts occur during 
middle/late childhood (Spreen, Riser, & Edgell, 1995). Between ages 
6 and 8, significant improvements in fine motor skills and eye-
hand coordination are noted. Then between 10 and 12 years of age, 
the frontal lobes become more developed and improvements in 
logic, planning, and memory are evident (van der 
Molen 
& Molenaar, 
1994). Myelination is one factor responsible for these growths. From 
age 6 to 12, the nerve cells in the association areas of the brain, that 
is those areas where sensory, motor, and intellectual functioning 
connect, become almost completely myelinated (Johnson, 2005). 
This myelination contributes to increases in information processing 
speed and the child’s reaction 
time. The hippocampus, responsible 
for transferring information from the short-term to long- term 
memory, also show increases in myelination resulting in 
improvements in memory functioning (Rolls, 2000). Children in 
middle to late childhood are also better able to plan, coordinate 
activity using both left and right hemispheres of the brain, and to 
control emotional outbursts. Paying attention is also improved as 
the prefrontal cortex matures (Markant & Thomas, 2013). 



Sports 

Middle childhood seems to be a great time to introduce children 
to organized sports, and in fact, many parents do. Nearly 3 million 
children play soccer in the United States (United States Youth 
Soccer, 2012). This activity promises to help children build social 
skills, improve athletically and learn a sense of competition. 
However, it has been suggested that the emphasis on competition 
and athletic skill can be counterproductive and lead children to 
grow tired of the game and want to quit. In many respects, it 
appears that children’s activities are no longer children’s activities 
once adults become involved and approach the games as adults 
rather than 
children. The U. S. Soccer Federation recently advised 
coaches to reduce the amount of drilling engaged in during practice 
and to allow children to play more freely and to choose their own 
positions. The hope is that this will build on their love of the game 
and foster their natural talents. 


Sports are important for children. Children’s participation in sports 
has been linked to: 


Higher levels of satisfaction with family and overall quality of 
life in 
children 
Improved physical and emotional development 
Better academic performance 


Yet, a study on children’s sports in the United States (Sabo & Veliz, 
2008) has found that gender, poverty, location, ethnicity, and 
disability can limit opportunities to engage in sports. Girls were 
more likely to have never participated in any type of sport (see 
Figure 5.2). They also found that fathers may not be providing their 
daughters as much support as they do their 
sons. 

While boys rated their fathers as their biggest mentor who taught 
them the most about sports, girls rated coaches and physical 
education teachers as their key mentors. Sabo and Veliz also found 
that children in suburban neighborhoods had a much higher 
participation of sports than boys and girls living in rural or urban 
centers. In addition, Caucasian girls and boys participated in 
organized sports at higher rates than minority children (see Figure 
5.3). 

Figure 5.2 



Figure 5.3 Percent of Students Participating in Organized Sports, by 
Gender, Race, and Ethnicity 

Finally, Sabo and Veliz asked children who had dropped out of 
organized sports why they left. For both girls and boys, the number 
one answer was that it was no longer any fun (see Table 5.1). 
According to the Sport Policy and Research Collaborative (SPARC) 
(2013), almost 1 in 3 children drop out of organized sports, and while 
there are many factors involved in the decisions to drop out, one 
suggestion has been the lack of training that coaches of children’s 
sports receive may be contributing to this attrition (Barnett, 
Smoll 
& 
Smith, 1992). Several studies have found that when coaches receive 
proper training, the drop-out rate is about 5% instead of the 
usual 
30% (Fraser-Thomas, 
Côté, & Deakin, 2005; SPARC, 
2013). 

Table 5.1 Top Reasons Dropped Out or Stopped Playing Organized/
Team Sports 


Welcome to the world of esports: 
According to Discover Esports 
(2017), 
esports 
is a form of competition with the medium being video 
games. 
Players use computers or specific video game consoles to 
play video games against each other. In addition to playing 
themselves, children my just watch others play the video games. 
The recent SPARC (2016) report on the “State of Play” in the United 
States highlights a disturbing trend. One in four children between 
the ages of 5 and 16 rate playing computer games with their friends 
as a form of exercise. Over half of males and about 20% of females, 
aged 12-19, say they are fans of esports. 

Since 2008 there has also been a downward trend in the number of 
sports children are engaged in, despite a body of research evidence 
that suggests that specializing in only one activity can increase the 
chances of injury, while playing multiple sports is protective (SPARC, 
2016). A University of Wisconsin study found that 49% of athletes 
who specialized in a sport experienced an injury compared with 
23% of those who played multiple sports (McGuine, 2016). 


Physical Education: 
For many children, physical education in school 
is a key component in introducing children to sports. After years 
of schools cutting back on physical education programs, there has 
been a 
turn around, prompted by concerns over childhood obesity 
and the related health issues. Despite these changes, currently only 
the state of Oregon and the District of Columbia meet PE guidelines 
of a minimum of 150 minutes per week of physical activity in 
elementary school and 225 minutes in middle school (SPARC, 2016). 

Childhood Obesity 

The decreased participation in school physical education and youth 
sports is just one of many factors that has led to an increase in 
children being overweight or obese. The current measurement for 
determining excess weight is the 
Body Mass Index (BMI) 
which 
expresses the relationship of height to weight. According to the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
children’s whose 
BMI is at or above the 85th 
percentile for their age 
are 
considered 
overweight, while 
children who are at or above the 
95th 
percentile 
are considered 
obese 
(Lu, 2016). In 2015-2016 
approximately 13.9% of 
2-5 year-olds 
and 18.4% of 
6-11 year-
olds 
were obese (Hales, Carroll, Fryar, & Ogden, 2017). Excess weight 
and obesity in children are associated with a variety of medical 
and cognitive conditions including high blood pressure, insulin 
resistance, inflammation, depression, and lower academic 
achievement (Lu, 2016). 

Being overweight has also been linked to impaired brain 
functioning, which includes deficits in executive functioning, 
working memory, mental flexibility, and decision making (Liang, 
Matheson, Kaye, & Boutelle, 2014). Children who ate more saturated 
fats performed worse on relational memory tasks, while eating a 
diet high in omega-3 fatty acids promoted relational memory skills 


(Davidson, 2014). Using animal studies Davidson et al. (2013) found 
that large amounts of processed sugars and saturated fat weakened 
the blood-brain barrier, especially in the hippocampus. This can 
make the brain more vulnerable to harmful substances that can 
impair its functioning. Another important executive functioning skill 
is controlling impulses and delaying gratification. Children who are 
overweight show less inhibitory control than normal weight 
children, which may make it more difficult for them to avoid 
unhealthy foods (Lu, 2016). Overall, being overweight as a child 
increases the risk for cognitive decline as one ages. 


Figure 5.4 Being Overweight can be a Lifelong Struggle 

A growing concern is the 
lack of recognition from parents that 
children are overweight or obese. Katz (2015) referred to this 
as 
oblivobesity. Black, Park and Gregson (2015) found that parents 
in the United Kingdom (UK) only recognized their children as obese 
when they were above the 99.7th 
percentile while the official cut-
off for obesity is at the 85th 
percentile. Oude 
Luttikhuis, 
Stolk, and 


intervene and assist their children with proper weight management. 
Sauer (2010) surveyed 439 parents and found that 75% of parents of 
overweight children said the child had a normal weight and 50% of 
parents of obese children said the child had a normal weight. For 
these parents, overweight was considered normal and obesity was 
considered normal or a little heavy. Doolen, Alpert, and Miller (2009) 
reported on several studies from the United Kingdom, Australia, 
Italy, and the United States, and in all locations, parents were more 
likely to misperceive their children’s weight. Black et al. (2015) 
concluded that as the average weight of children rises, what parents 
consider normal also rises. Needless to say, if parents cannot 
identify if their children are 
overweight 
they will not be able to 

An added concern is that the children themselves are not accurately 
identifying if they are overweight. In a United States sample of 
8-15 year-olds, more than 80% of overweight boys and 70% of 
overweight girls misperceived their weight as normal (Sarafrazi, 
Hughes, & Borrud, 2014). Also noted was that as the socioeconomic 
status of the children rose, the frequency of these misconceptions 
decreased. It appeared that families with more resources were more 
conscious of what defines a healthy weight. 

Children who are overweight tend to be rejected, ridiculed, teased 
and bullied by others (Stopbullying.gov, 2018). This can certainly 
be damaging to their self-image and popularity. In addition, obese 
children run the risk of suffering orthopedic problems such as knee 
injuries, and they have an increased risk of heart disease and stroke 
in adulthood (Lu, 2016). It is hard for a child who is obese to become 
a non-obese adult. In addition, the number of cases of pediatric 
diabetes has risen dramatically in recent years. 

Behavioral interventions, including training children to overcome 
impulsive behavior, are being researched to help overweight 
children (Lu, 2016). 


Practicing inhibition has been shown to strengthen the ability to 
resist unhealthy foods. Parents can help their overweight children 
the best when they are warm and supportive without using shame 
or guilt. Parents can also act like the child’s frontal lobe until it is 
developed by helping them make correct food choices and praising 
their efforts (Liang, et al., 2014). Research also shows that exercise, 
especially aerobic exercise, can help improve cognitive functioning 
in overweight 
children (Lu, 2016). Parents should take caution 
against emphasizing diet alone to avoid the development of any 
obsession about dieting that can lead to eating disorders. Instead, 
increasing a child’s activity level is most helpful. 


In 2018 the American Psychological Association (APA) developed 
a clinical practice guideline that recommends family-based, 
multicomponent behavioral interventions to treat obesity and 
overweight in children 2 to 18 (Weir, 2019). The guidelines 
recommend counseling on diet, physical activity and “teaching 


parents strategies for goal setting, problem-solving, monitoring 
children’s behaviors, and modeling positive parental behaviors,” (p. 
32). Early research results have shown success using this model 
compared to controls. Because there is no quick fix for weight 
loss, the program recommends 26 contact hours with the family. 
Unfortunately, for many families cost, location, and time 
commitment make it difficult for them to receive the interventions. 
APA has recommended that behavioral treatment could be delivered 
in primary care offices to encourage greater particiapation. APA 
also recommend that schools and communities need to offer more 
nutritious meals to children and limit sodas and unhealthy foods. 

References 

Aiken, L. R. (1994). Psychological testing and assessment (8th ed.). 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 

Alloway, T. P. (2009). Working memory, but not IQ, predicts 
subsequent learning in children with learning difficulties. 
European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 25, 92-98. 

Alloway, T. P., Bibile, V., & Lau, G. (2013). Computerized working 
memory training: Can lead to gains in cognitive skills in students? 
Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 632-638. 

American Civil Liberties Union (2016). Overview of lesbian and gay 
parenting, adoption and foster care. Retrieved from 
https://www.aclu.org/fact-sheet/overview-lesbian-and-gay-
parenting-adoption-and-foster-care?redirect=overviewlesbian-
and-gay-parenting-adoption-and-foster-care 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Association. 

American Speech-Language and Hearing Association. (2016). Voice 
disorders. Retrieved from http://www.asha.org/PracticePortal/
Clinical-Topics/Voice-Disorders/ Arditti, J. A. (1999). Rethinking 


relationships between divorced mothers and their children: 
Capitalizing on family strengths. Family Relations, 48, 109-119. 

Anderson, J. (2018). The impact of family structure on the health of 
children: Effects of divorce. The Linacre Quarterly 81(4), 378–387. 

Arkowicz, H., & Lilienfeld. (2013). Is divorce bad for children? 
Scientific American Mind, 24(1), 68-69. Figure 5.27 206 

Asher, S. R., & Hymel, S. (1981). Children’s social competence in peer 
relations: Sociometric and behavioral assessment. In J. K. Wine 
& M. D. Smye (Eds.), Social competence (pp. 125-157). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Banaschewski, T., Becker, K., Döpfner, M., Holtmann, M., Rösler, M., 
& Romanos, M. (2017). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. A 
current overview. Deutsches Ärzteblatt International, 114, 149-159. 

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of 
behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84, 191-215. 

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social 
cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: 
Freeman. 

Barnett, N. P., Smoll, F. L., & Smith, R. E. (1992). Effects of enhancing 
coach-athlete relationships on youth sport attrition. The Sport 
Psychologist, 6, 111-127. 

Barbaresi, W. J., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L., Voigt, R. G., Killian, 
J. M., & Katusic, S. K. (2013). Mortality, ADHD, and psychosocial 
adversity in adults with childhood ADHD: A prospective study. 
Pediatrics, 131, 637–644. 

Barkley, R. A. (2006). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A 
handbook for diagnosis and treatment. New York, NY: Guilford 
Press. 

Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Smallish, L., & Fletcher, K. (2002). The 
persistence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder into 
young adulthood as a function of reporting source and definition 
of disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 279–289. 

Beaulieu, C. (2004). Intercultural study of personal space: A case 
study. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(4), 794-805. 


Berk, L. (2007). Development through the life span (4th ed.). Boston: 
Allyn and Bacon. Berger, K. S. (2014). The developing person: 
Through the life span. NY: Worth Publishers. 

Bigelow, B. J. (1977). Children’s friendship expectations: A cognitive 
developmental study. Child Development, 48, 246–253. 

Bigelow, B. J., & La Gaipa, J. J. (1975). Children’s written descriptions 
of friendship: A multidimensional analysis. Developmental 
Psychology, 11(6), 857-858. 

Binet, A., Simon, T., & Town, C. H. (1915). A method of measuring 
the development of the intelligence of young children (3rd ed.) 
Chicago, IL: Chicago Medical Book. 

Bink, M. L., & Marsh, R. L. (2000). Cognitive regularities in creative 
activity. Review of General Psychology, 4(1), 59–78. 

Bjorklund, D. F. (2005). Children’s thinking: Developmental function 
and individual differences (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Black, J. A., Park, M., Gregson, J. (2015). Child obesity cut-offs as 
derived from parental perceptions: Cross-sectional 
questionnaire. British Journal of General Practice, 65, e234-e239. 

Boulton, M. J. (1999). Concurrent and longitudinal relations between 
children’s playground behavior and social preference, 
victimization, and bullying. Child Development, 70, 944-954. 

Brody, N. (2003). Construct validation of the Sternberg Triarchic 
Abilities Test: Comment and reanalysis. Intelligence, 31(4), 
319–329. 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: 
Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
Univeristy Press. 

Brown, S. L. (2000). Union transitions among cohabitors: The 
significance of relationship assessments and expectations. 
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 833-846. 207 

Bruning, R. H., Schraw, G. J., Norby, M. M., & Ronning, R. R. (2004). 
Cognitive psychology and instruction. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson. 

Burt, S. A. (2009). Rethinking environmental contributions to child 


and adolescent psychopathology: A meta-analysis of shared 
environmental influences. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 608–637. 

Carlson, N. (2013). Physiology of behavior. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education. 

Carlson, S. M., & Zelazo, P. D., & Faja, S. (2013). Executive function. 
In P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of developmental 
psychology, Vol. 1: Body and mind (pp. 706-743). New York: Oxford 
University Press 

Camarota, S. A., & Zeigler, K. (2015). One in five U. S. residents speaks 
foreign language at home. Retrieved from https://cis.org/sites/
default/files/camarota-language-15.pdf 

Cazden, C. (2001). Classroom discourse, (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, NH: 
Heineman Publishers. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). 2000 CDC 
growth charts for the United States: Methods and development. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_11/
sr11_246.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2010, November 12). 
Increasing prevalence of parent reported attentiondeficit/
hyperactivity disorder among children, United States, 2003–2007. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 59(44), 1439–1443. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Birth defects. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/
downsyndrome/data.html 

Chao, R. (2001). Extending research on the consequences of 
parenting styles for Chinese Americans and European Americans. 
Child Development, 72, 1832-1843. 

Cillesen, A. H., & Mayeaux, L. (2004). From censure to reinforcement: 
Developmental changes in the association between aggression 
and social status. Child Development, 75, 147-163. 

Clark, M. L., & Bittle, M. L. (1992). Friendship expectations and the 
evaluation of present friendships in middle childhood and early 
adolescence. Child Study Journal, 22, 115–135. 

Clay, R. A. (2013). Psychologists are using research-backed 


behavioral interventions that effectively treat children with 
ADHD. Monitor on Psychology, 44(2), 45-47. 

Cohen, E. (2004). Teaching cooperative learning: The challenge for 
teacher education. Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Press. 

Colangelo, N., & Assouline, S. (2009). Acceleration: Meeting the 
academic and social needs of students. In T. Balchin, B. Hymer, & 
D. J. Matthews (Eds.), The Routledge international companion to 
gifted education (pp. 194–202). New York, NY: Routledge. 

Cowan, R., & Powell, D. (2014). The contributions of domain-general 
and numerical factors to third-grade arithmetic skills and 
mathematical learning disability. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 106, 214-229. 

Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development (5th ed.). Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson. 

Davidson, T. L. (2014). Do impaired memory and body weight 
regulation originate in childhood with diet-induced hippocampal 
dysfunction? The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 99(5), 
971-972. 

Davidson, T. L., Hargrave, S. L., Swithers, S. E., Sample, C. H., Fu, 
X., Kinzig, K. P., & Zheng, W. (2013). Inter-relationships among 
diet, obesity, and hippocampal-dependent cognitive function. 
Neuroscience, 253, 110-122. 

de Ribaupierre, A. (2002). Working memory and attentional 
processes across the lifespan. In P. Graf & N. Ohta (Eds.), Lifespan 
of development of human memory (pp. 59-80). Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press. 208 

Discover Esports. (2017). What are esports? Retrieved from 
https://discoveresports.com/what-are-esports/ 

Doolen, J., Alpert, P. T. and Miller, S. K. (2009), Parental disconnect 
between perceived and actual weight status of children: A 
metasynthesis of the current research. Journal of the American 
Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 21, 160–166. doi:10.1111/
j.1745-7599.2008.00382.x 

Drexler, P. (2005). Raising boys without men. Emmaus, PA: Rodale. 


Dutton, E., van der Linden, D., Lynn, R. (2016). The negative Flynn 
effect: A systematic literature review. Intelligence, 59, 163- 169. 
Ennis, R. H. (1987). A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and 
abilities. In J. Baron & R. Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching thinking skills: 
Theory and practice (pp. 9-26). New York: Freeman. 

Ericsson, K. (1998). The scientific study of expert levels of 
performance: General implications for optimal learning and 
creativity. High Ability Studies, 9(1), 75–100. 

Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed. NY: Norton & Company. 

Flynn, J. R. (1999). Searching for justice: The discovery of IQ gains 
over time. American Psychologist, 54(1), 5–20. 

Francis, N. (2006). The development of secondary discourse ability 
and metalinguistic awareness in second language learners. 
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 16, 37-47. 

Fraser-Thomas, J. L., Côté, J., & Deakin, J. (2005). Youth sport 
programs: An avenue to foster positive youth development. 
Physical Education & Sport Pedagogy, 10, 19-40. 

Furnham, A., & Bachtiar, V. (2008). Personality and intelligence as 
predictors of creativity. Personality and Individual Differences, 
45(7), 613–617. 

Furstenberg, F. F., & Cherlin, A. J. (1991). Divided families: What 
happens to children when parents part. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple 
intelligences. New York: Basic Books. 

Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for 
the 21st century. New York, NY: Basic Books. 

Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and 
women’s development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Gizer, I. R., Ficks, C., & Waldman, I. D. (2009). Candidate gene studies 
of ADHD: A meta-analytic review. Human Genetics, 126, 51–90. 

Gottfredson, L. S. (1997). Mainstream science on intelligence: An 
editorial with 52 signatories, history and bibliography. 
Intelligence, 24(1), 13–23. 


Gottfredson, L. S. (2003). Dissecting practical intelligence theory: Its 
claims and evidence. Intelligence, 31(4), 343–397. 

Greenspan, S., Loughlin, G., & Black, R. S. (2001). Credulity and 
gullibility in people with developmental disorders: A framework 
for future research. In L. M. Glidden (Ed.), Internationalreview 
ofresearch in mental retardation (Vol. 24, pp. 101–135). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 

Guttmann, J. (1993). Divorce in psychosocial perspective: Theory 
and research. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates. 

Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social 
intuitionist approach to moral judgment. Psychological Review, 
108(4), 814–834. 

Hales, C.M., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Ogden, C.L. (2017). 
Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: United States, 
2015–2016. NCHS data brief, no 288. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics. 209 

Halpern, D. F. (1992). Sex differences in cognitive abilities (2nd ed.). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Hansen, L., Umeda, Y., & McKinney, M. (2002). Savings in the 
relearning of second language vocabulary: The effects of time and 
proficiency. Language Learning, 52, 653-663. 

Hartup, W. W. (1983). Adolescents and their friends. New Directions 
for Child and Adolescent Development, 60, 3-22. 

Hennessey, B. A., & Amabile, T. M. (2010). Creativity. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 61, 569–598. 

Hetherington, E. M., & Kelly, J. (2002). For better or for worse: 
Divorce reconsidered. New York: W.W. Norton. 

Horvat, E. M. (2004). Moments of social inclusion and exclusion: 
Race, class, and cultural capital in family-school relationships. In 
A. Lareau (Author) & J. H. Ballantine & J. Z. Spade (Eds.), Schools 
and society: A sociological approach to education (2nd ed., pp. 
276-286). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Hoza, B., Mrug, S., Gerdes, A. C., Hinshaw, S. P., Bukowski, W. M., 
Gold, J. A., . . . Arnold, L. E. (2005). What aspects of peer 


relationships are impaired in children with ADHD? Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 411–423. 

Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from 
childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic Books. 

Jaffee, S., & Hyde, J. S. (2000). Gender differences in moral 
orientation: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 126(5), 703– 
726. 

Jimenez, R., Garcia, G., & Pearson. D. (1995). Three children, two 
languages, and strategic reading: Case studies in bilingual/
monolingual reading. American Educational Research Journal, 32 
(1), 67-97. Johnson, D., & Johnson, R. (1998). Learning together and 
alone: Cooperative, competitive, and individualistic learning, (5th 
ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Johnson, M. (2005). Developmental neuroscience, 
psychophysiology, and genetics. In M. Bornstein & M. Lamb (Eds.), 
Developmental science: An advanced textbook (5th ed., pp. 
187-222). 

Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Johnson, W., Carothers, A., & Deary, I. J. 
(2009). A role for the X chromosome in sex differences in 
variability in general intelligence? Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 4(6), 598–611. 

Kail, R. V., McBride-Chang, C., Ferrer, E., Cho, J.R., & Shu, H. (2013). 
Cultural differences in the development of processing speed. 
Developmental Science, 16, 476-483. 

Katz, D. L. (2015). Oblivobesity: Looking over the overweight that 
parents keep overlooking. Childhood Obesity, 11(3), 225- 226. 

Klein, R. G., Mannuzza, S., Olazagasti, M. A. R., Roizen, E., Hutchison, 
J. A., Lashua, E. C., & Castellanos, F. X. (2012). Clinical and 
functional outcome of childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder 33 years later. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 
1295–1303. 

Klima, T., & Repetti, R. L. (2008). Children’s peer relations and their 
psychological adjustment: Differences between close friends and 
the larger peer group. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 54, 151-178. 

Kohlberg, L. (1963). The development of children’s orientations 


toward a moral order: Sequence in the development of moral 
thought. Vita Humana, 16, 11-36. 

Kohlberg, L. (1984). The psychology of moral development: Essays on 
moral development (Vol. 2, p. 200). San Francisco, CA: Harper & 
Row. 

Kohnert, K., Yim, D., Nett, K., Kan, P., & Duran, L. (2005). Intervention 
with linguistically diverse preschool children. Language, Speech, 
and Hearing Services in Schools, 36, 251-263. 

Lally, M. J., & Valentine-French, S. J. (2018). Introduction to 
Psychology [Adapted from Charles Stangor, Introduction to 
Psychology] Grayslake, IL: College of Lake County. 210 

Liang, J., Matheson, B., Kaye, W., & Boutelle, K. (2014). 
Neurocognitive correlates of obesity and obesity-related 
behaviors in children and adolescents. International Journal of 
Obesity, 38(4), 494-506 

Linnet, K. M., Dalsgaard, S., Obel, C., Wisborg, K., Henriksen, T. B., 
Rodriquez, A., . . . Jarvelin, M. R.(2003). Maternal lifestyle factors 
in pregnancy risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and 
associated behaviors: A review of current evidence. The American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1028–1040. 

Livingston, G. (2018). About one-third of U.S. children are living 
with an unmarried parent. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/27/about-
one-third-of-u-s-children-are-living-with-an-
unmarriedparent/ 

Loe, I. M., & Feldman, H. M. (2007). Academic and educational 
outcomes of children with ADHD. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 
32, 643–654. 

Lofquist, D. (2011). Same-sex households. Current population 
reports, ACSBR/10-03. U.S. CensusBureau, Washington, DC. 
Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/
acsbr10-03.pdf 

Lu, S. (2016). Obesity and the growing brain. Monitor on Psychology, 
47(6), 40-43. 

Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2006). Study of mathematically 


precocious youth after 35 years: Uncovering antecedents for the 
development of math-science expertise. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 1(4), 316–345. 

Macbeth, D. (2003). Hugh Mehan’s Learning Lessons reconsidered: 
On the differences between naturalistic and critical analysis of 
classroom discourse. American Educational Research Journal, 40 
(1), 239-280. 

Markant, J. C., & Thomas, K. M. (2013). Postnatal brain development. 
In P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), Oxford handbook of developmental 
psychology. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Marshal, M. P., & Molina, B. S. G. (2006). Antisocial behaviors 
moderate the deviant peer pathway to substance use in children 
with ADHD. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 
35, 216–226. 

McCann, D., Barrett, A., Cooper, A., Crumpler, D., Dalen, L., 
Grimshaw, K., . . . Stevenson, J. (2007). Food additives and 
hyperactive behaviour in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children 
in the community: A randomised, double-blinded, placebo-
controlled trial. The Lancet, 370(9598), 1560–1567. 

McGuine, T. A. (2016). The association of sports specialization and 
history of lower extremity injury in high school athletes. Medical 
Science in Sports and Exercise, 45 (supplement 5), 866. 

McLanahan, S., & Sandefur, G. D. (1994). Growing up with a single 
parent: What hurts, what helps. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Medline Plus. (2016a). Phonological disorder. National Institute of 
Mental Health: U.S. National Library of Medicine. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001541.htm 

Medline Plus. (2016b). Speech and communication disorders. 
National Institute of Mental Health: U.S. National Library of 
Medicine. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/
speechandcommunicationdisorders.html 

Medline Plus. (2016c). Stuttering. National Institute of Mental 
Health: U.S. National Library of Medicine. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001427.htm 


Miller, P. H. (2000). How best to utilize a deficiency? Child 
Development, 71, 1013-1017. 

Minami, M. (2002). Culture-specific language styles: The 
development of oral narrative and literacy. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 

National Center for Learning Disabilities. (2017). The state of LD: 
Understanding the 1 in 5. Retrieved from https://www.ncld.org/
archives/blog/the-state-of-ld-understanding-the-1-in-5 

National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. (2016). 
Dyslexia information page. Retrieved from 
https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/All-Disorders/Dyslexia-
Information-Page 211 

National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders. 
(2016). Stuttering. Retrieved from https://www.nidcd.nih.gov/
health/stuttering 

Neisser, U. (1997). Rising scores on intelligence tests. American 
Scientist, 85, 440-447. 

Neisser, U. (1998). The rising curve. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Oude Luttikhuis, H., Stolk, R. and Sauer, P. (2010), How do parents 
of 4- to 5-year-old children perceive the weight of their children? 
Acta Pædiatrica, 99, 263–267. doi:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2009.01576.x 

Patterson, C. J. (2013). Children of lesbian and gay parents: 
Psychology, law, and Policy. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and 
Gender Diversity, 1, 27-34. 

Pettit, G. S., Clawson, M. A., Dodge, K. A., & Bates, J. E. (1996). 
Stability and change in peer-rejected status: The role of child 
behavior, parenting, and family ecology. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 
42(2), 267-294. 

Pew Research Center. (2010). New family types. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/11/18/vi-new-
familytypes/ 

Pew Research Center. (2015). Parenting in America. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/wpcontent/uploads/sites/3/
2015/12/2015-12-17_parenting-in-america_FINAL.pdf 


Plante, I., De la Sablonnière, R., Aronson, J. M., & Théorêt, M. (2013). 
Gender stereotype endorsement and achievement-related 
outcomes: The role of competence beliefs and task values. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 38(3), 225-235. 

PreBler, A., Krajewski, K., & Hasselhorn, M. (2013). Working memory 
capacity in preschool children contributes to the acquisition of 
school relevant precursor skills. Learning and Individual 
Differences, 23, 138-144. 

Public Law 93-112, 87 Stat. 394 (Sept. 26, 1973). Rehabilitation Act of 
1973. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office. 

Public Law 101-336, 104 Stat. 327 (July 26, 1990). Americans with 
Disabilities Act of 1990. Washington, D.C.: United States 
Government Printing Office. 

Public Law 108-446, 118 Stat. 2647 (December 3, 2004). Individuals 
with Disabilities Education Improvement Act. Washington, D.C.: 
United States Government Printing Office. 

Reid, S. (2017). 4 questions for Mitch Prinstein. Monitor on 
Psychology, 48(8), 31-32. 

Rest, J. (1979). Development in judging moral issues. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 

Retelsdorf, J., Asbrock, F., & Schwartz, K. (2015). “Michael can’t read!” 
teachers’ gender stereotypes and boys’ reading selfconcept. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 186-194. 

Richter, D, & Lemola, S. (2017). Growing up with a single mother and 
life satisfaction in adulthood: A test of mediating and moderating 
factors. PLOS ONE 12(6): e0179639. Retrieved from 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0179639 

Rogers, R., Malancharuvil-Berkes, E., Mosely, M., Hui, D., & O’Garro, 
G. (2005). Critical discourse analysis in education: A review of the 
literature. Review of Educational Research, 75 (3), 365-416. 

Rogoff, B. (2003). The culture of human development. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Rolls, E. (2000). Memory systems in the brain. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 51, 599-630. 


Ross, H. S., & Lollis, S. P. (1989). A social relations analysis of toddler 
peer relations. Child Development, 60, 1082-1091. 

Rubin, R. (1980). Children’s friendships. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Sabo, D., & Veliz, P. (2008). Go out and play: Youth sports in America. 
East Meadow, NY: Women’s Sports Foundation 212 

Sarafrazi, N., Hughes, J. P., & Borrud, L. (2014). Perception of weight 
status in U.S. children and adolescents aged 8-15 years, 
2005-2012. NCHS Data Brief, 158, 1-8. 

Schneider, W., Kron-Sperl, V., & Hünnerkopf, M. (2009). The 
development of young children’s memory strategies: Evidence 
from the Würzburg Longitudinal Memory Study. European 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6, 70-99. 

Schneider, W., & Pressley, M. (1997). Memory development between 
2 and 20. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Schwartz, D., Lansford, J. E., Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., & Bates, J. 
E. (2014). Peer victimization during middle childhood as a lead 
indicator of internalizing problems and diagnostic outcomes in 
late adolescence. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent 
Psychology, 44, 393-404. 

Seagoe, M. V. (1975). Terman and the gifted. Los Altos, CA: William 
Kaufmann. 

Seccombe, K., & Warner, R. L. (2004). Marriages and families: 
Relationships in social context. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/
Thomson Learning. 

Seifert, K. (2011). Educational psychology. Houston, TX: Rice 
University. 

Selman, Robert L. (1980). The growth of interpersonal 
understanding. London: Academic Press. 

Siegler, R. S. (1992). The other Alfred Binet. Developmental 
Psychology, 28(2), 179–190. 

Simonton, D. K. (1992). The social context of career success and 
course for 2,026 scientists and inventors. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 18(4), 452–463. 

Simonton, D. K. (2000). Creativity: Cognitive, personal, 


developmental, and social aspects. American Psychologist, 55(1), 
151– 158. 

Sodian, B., & Schneider, W. (1999). Memory strategy development: 
Gradual increase, sudden insight or roller coaster? In F. E. 
Weinert & W. Schneider (Eds.), Individual development from 3 
to 12: Findings from the Munich Longitudinal Study (pp. 61-77). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Sourander, A., Sucksdorff, M., Chudal, R, Surcel, H., Hinkka-Yli-
Salomäki, S., Gyllenberg, D., Cheslack-Postava, K., & Brown, A. 
(2019). Prenatal cotinine levels and ADHD among offspring. 
Pediatrics, 143(3), e20183144. 

Sport Policy and Research Collaborative (SPARC, 2013). What is the 
status of youth coach training in the U.S.? University of Florida. 
Retrieved from https://assets.aspeninstitute.org/content/
uploads/files/content/upload/
Project%20Play%20Research%20Brief%20Coach 
ing%20Education%20–%20FINAL.pdf 

Sport Policy and Research Collaborative (SPARC, 2016). State of play 
2016: Trends and developments. The Aspen Institute. Retrieved 
from https://www.aspeninstitute.org/publications/state-
play-2016-trends-developments/ 

Spreen, O., Rissser, A., & Edgell, D. (1995). Developmental 
neuropsychology. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of human 
intelligence. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Sternberg, R. J. (2003). Contemporary theories of intelligence. In 
W. M. Reynolds & G. E. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: 
Educational psychology (Vol. 7, pp. 23–45). Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons. 

Sternberg, R. J., Wagner, R. K., & Okagaki, L. (1993). Practical 
intelligence: The nature and role of tacit knowledge in work and 
at school. In J. M. Puckett & H. W. Reese (Eds.), Mechanisms of 
everyday cognition (pp. 205–227). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 

Stewart, A. J., Copeland, Chester, Malley, & Barenbaum. (1997). 


Separating together: How divorce transforms families. New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Stewart, S. M. & Bond, M. H. (2002), A critical look at parenting 
research from the mainstream: Problems uncovered while 
adapting Western research to non-Western cultures. British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, 379–392. doi:10.1348/
026151002320620389 213 

Stopbullying.gov. (2018). Preventing weight-based bullying. 
Retrieved from https://www.stopbullying.gov/blog/2018/11/05/
preventing-weight-based-bullying.html 

Swanson, J. M., Kinsbourne, M., Nigg, J., Lamphear, B., Stefanatos, 
G. A., Volkow, N., …& Wadhwa, P. D. (2007). Etiologic subtypes 
of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: brain imaging, 
molecular genetic and environmental factors and the dopamine 
hypothesis. Neuropsychological Review, 17(1), 39-59. 

Tarasova, I. V., Volf, N. V., & Razoumnikova, O. M. (2010). Parameters 
of cortical interactions in subjects with high and low levels of 
verbal creativity. Human Physiology, 36(1), 80–85. 

Terman, L. M., & Oden, M. H. (1959). Genetic studies of genius: The 
gifted group at mid-life (Vol. 5). Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. 

Thakur, G. A., Sengupta, S. M., Grizenko, N., Schmitz, N., Page, V., & 
Joober, R. (2013). Maternal smoking during pregnancy and ADHD: 
A comprehensive clinical and neurocognitive characterization. 
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 15, 149– 157. 

Tharp, R. & Gallimore, R. (1989). Rousing minds to life. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Thompson, A., Molina, B. S. G., Pelham, W., & Gnagy, E. M. (2007). 
Risky driving in adolescents and young adults with childhood 
ADHD. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32, 745–759. 

Torres-Guzman, M. (1998). Language culture, and literacy in Puerto 
Rican communities. In B. Perez (Ed.), Sociocultural contexts of 
language and literacy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Treffert, D. A., & Wallace, G. L. (2004). Islands of genius. Scientific 


American, 14–23. Retrieved from http://gordonresearch.com/
articles_autism/SciAm-Islands_of_Genius.pdf 

Tse, L. (2001). Why don’t they learn English? New York: Teachers’ 
College Press. 

Turiel, E. (1998). The development of morality. In W. Damon (Ed.), 
Handbook of child psychology: Socialization (5th ed., Vol. 3, pp. 
863–932). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. 

United States Department of Education. (2017). Every Student 
Succeeds Act (ESSA). Retrieved from https://www.ed.gov/
essa?src=ft United States Youth Soccer. (2012). 

US youth soccer at a glance. Retrieved from 
http://www.usyouthsoccer.org/media_kit/ataglance/ 

Vakil, E., Blachstein, H., Sheinman, M., & Greenstein, Y. (2009). 
Developmental changes in attention tests norms: Implications for 
the structure of attention. Child Neuropsychology, 15, 21-39. 

van der Molen, M., & Molenaar, P. (1994). Cognitive 
psychophysiology: A window to cognitive development and brain 
maturation. In G. Dawson & K. Fischer (Eds.), Human behavior and 
the developing brain. New York: Guilford. 

Visher, E. B., & Visher, J. S. (1985). Stepfamilies are different. Journal 
of Family Therapy, 7(1), 9-18. 

Volkow N. D., Fowler J. S., Logan J., Alexoff D., Zhu W., Telang F., . 
. . Apelskog-Torres K. (2009). Effects of modafinil on dopamine 
and dopamine transporters in the male human brain: Clinical 
implications. Journal of the American Medical Association, 301, 
1148–1154. 

Wagner, R., & Sternberg, R. (1985). Practical intelligence in real-
world pursuits: The role of tacit knowledge. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 49(2), 436–458. 

Watkins, C. E., Campbell, V. L., Nieberding, R., & Hallmark, R. (1995). 
Contemporary practice of psychological assessment by clinical 
psychologists. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 
26(1), 54–60. 

Weaver, J. M., & Schofield, T. J. (2015). Mediation and moderation of 
divorce effects on children’s behavior problems. Journal of Family 


Psychology, 29(1), 39-48. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
fam0000043 214 

Weir, K. (2019). Family-based behavioral treatment is key to 
addressing childhood obesity. Monitor on Pscyhology, 50(4), 31- 
35. 

Weisberg, R. (2006). Creativity: Understanding innovation in 
problem solving, science, invention, and the arts. Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons. 

Wilens, E., Fararone, S.V., Biederman, J., & Gunawardene, S. (2003). 
Does the treatment of Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
with stimulants contribute to use/abuse? Pediatrics, 111(1), 97-109. 

Wolraich, M. L., Wilson, D. B., & White, J. W. (1995). The effect 
of sugar on behavior or cognition in children. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 274, 1617–1621. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 5 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 17: Cognitive 
Development in Middle 
Childhood 

Chapter 17 Learning Objectives 

Describe Piaget’s concrete operational stage and 
the characteristics of concrete thought 
Describe information processing research on 
memory, attention, knowledgebase, metacognition, 
and critical thinking 
Describe language development and explain the 
three types of communication disorders 
Describe the theories of intelligence, including 
general “g”, triarchic theory, and Gardner’s multiple 
intelligences 
Explain how intelligence is measured, the tests 
used to assess intelligence, the extremes in 
intelligence, and the concern of bias 
Describe how language and culture influence the 
typical classroom 
Identify common disabilities in childhood and the 
legislation that protects them educationally 



Recall from the last chapter that children in early childhood are 
in Piaget’s preoperational stage, and during this stage, children are 
learning to think symbolically about the world. Cognitive skills 
continue to expand in middle and late childhood as thought 
processes become more logical and organized when dealing with 
concrete information. Children at this age understand concepts 
such as past, present, and future, giving them the ability to plan 
and work toward goals. Additionally, they can process complex ideas 
such as addition and subtraction and cause-and-effect 
relationships. 


Concrete Operational Thought 

From ages 7 to 11, children are in what Piaget referred to as the 
concrete operational stage of cognitive development (Crain, 2005). 
This involves mastering the use of logic in concrete ways. The word 
concrete refers to that which is tangible; that which can be seen, 
touched or experienced directly. The concrete operational child is 
able to make use of logical principles in solving problems involving 
the physical world. For example, the child can understand the 
principles of cause and effect, size, and distance. 

The child can use logic to solve problems tied to their own direct 
experience but has trouble solving hypothetical problems or 
considering more abstract problems. The child uses inductive 
reasoning, which is a logical process in which multiple premises 
believed to be true are combined to obtain a specific conclusion. 
For example, a child has one friend who is rude, another friend who 
is also rude, and the same is true for a third friend. The child may 
conclude that friends are rude. We will see that this way of thinking 
tends to change during adolescence being replaced with deductive 
reasoning. We will now explore some of the major abilities that the 
concrete child exhibits. 


Classification: 
As children’s experiences and vocabularies grow, 
they build schemata and are able to organize objects in many 
different ways. They also understand classification hierarchies and 
can arrange objects into a variety of classes and subclasses. 

Identity: 
One feature of concrete operational thought is the 
understanding that objects have qualities that do not change even if 
the object is altered in some 
way. For instance, the mass of an object 
does not change by rearranging it. A piece of chalk is still chalked 
even when the piece is broken in two. 


Reversibility: The child learns that some things that have been 
changed can be returned to their original state. Water can be frozen 
and then thawed to become liquid again, but eggs cannot be 
unscrambled. Arithmetic operations are reversible as well: 2 + 3 = 
5 and 5 – 3 = 2. Many of these cognitive skills are incorporated 


into the school’s curriculum through mathematical problems and in 
worksheets about which situations are reversible or 
irreversible. 


Conservation: Remember the example in our last chapter of 
preoperational children thinking that a tall beaker filled with 8 
ounces of water was “more” than a short, wide bowl filled with 
8 ounces of water? Concrete operational children can understand 
the concept of conservation 
which means that changing one quality 
(in this example, height or water level) can be compensated for 
by changes in another quality (width). 
Consequently, there is the 
same amount of water in each container, although one is taller and 
narrower and the other is shorter and wider. 

Decentration: Concrete operational children no longer focus on 
only one dimension of any object (such as the height of the glass) 
and instead consider the changes in other dimensions too (such as 
the width of the glass). This allows for conservation to occur. 

Seriation: Arranging items along a quantitative dimension, such 
as length or weight, in a methodical way 
is now demonstrated by 
the concrete operational child. For example, they can methodically 
arrange a series of different-sized sticks in order by length, while 
younger children approach a similar task in a haphazard way. 

These new cognitive skills increase the child’s understanding of 
the physical world, however according to Piaget, they still cannot 
think in abstract ways. Additionally, they do not think in systematic 
scientific ways. For example, when asked which variables influence 
the period that a pendulum takes to complete its arc and given 
weights they can attach to strings in order to do 
experiments, most 
children younger than 12 perform biased experiments from which 
no conclusions can be drawn (Inhelder 
& Piaget, 1958). 



Information Processing 

Children differ in their memory abilities, and these differences 
predict both their readiness for school and academic performance 
in school (PreBler, Krajewski, & Hasselhorn, 2013). During middle 
and late childhood children make strides in several areas of 
cognitive function including the capacity of working memory, their 
ability to pay attention, and their use of memory strategies. Both 
changes in the brain and experience foster these abilities. 

Working Memory: The capacity of working memory expands during 
middle and late childhood, and research has suggested that both 
an increase in processing speed and the ability to inhibit irrelevant 
information from entering memory are contributing to the greater 
efficiency of working memory during this age (de Ribaupierre, 
2002). Changes in myelination and synaptic pruning in the cortex 
are likely behind the increase in processing speed and ability to 
filter out irrelevant stimuli (Kail, McBride-Chang, Ferrer, Cho, & Shu, 
2013). 

Children with learning disabilities in math and reading often have 
difficulties with working memory (Alloway, 2009). They may 
struggle with following the directions of an assignment. When a task 
calls for multiple steps, children with poor working memory may 
miss steps because they may lose track of where they are in the 
task. Adults working with such children may need to communicate: 
Using more familiar vocabulary, using shorter sentences, repeating 
task instructions more frequently, and breaking more complex tasks 
into smaller more manageable steps. Some studies have also shown 
that more intensive training of working memory strategies, such 
as chunking, aid in improving the capacity of working memory in 
children with poor working memory (Alloway, Bibile, & Lau, 2013). 

Attention: 
As noted above, the ability to inhibit irrelevant 
information improves during this age group, with there being a 


sharp improvement in selective attention from age six into 
adolescence (Vakil, 
Blachstein, 
Sheinman, & Greenstein, 2009). 
Children also improve in their ability to shift their attention 
between tasks or different features of a task (Carlson, Zelazo, & 
Faja, 2013). A younger child who is asked to sort objects into piles 
based on type of object, car versus 
animal, or color of object, red 
versus blue, may have difficulty if you switch from asking them to 
sort based on type to now having them sort based on color. This 
requires them to suppress the prior sorting rule. An older child has 
less difficulty making the switch, meaning there is greater flexibility 
in their attentional skills. These changes in attention and working 
memory contribute to children having more strategic approaches to 
challenging 
tasks. 

Memory Strategies: Bjorklund (2005) describes a developmental 
progression in the acquisition and use of memory strategies. Such 
strategies are often lacking in younger children but increase in 
frequency as children progress through elementary school. 
Examples of memory strategies include rehearsing information you 
wish to recall, visualizing and organizing information, creating 
rhymes, such “i” before “e” except after “c”, or inventing acronyms, 
such as “roygbiv” to remember the colors of the rainbow. Schneider, 
Kron-Sperl, and 
Hünnerkopf 
(2009) reported a steady increase in 
the use of memory strategies from ages six to ten in their 
longitudinal study (see Table 5.2). Moreover, by age ten many 
children were using two or more memory strategies 
to help them 
recall information. Schneider and colleagues found that there were 
considerable individual differences at each age in the use of 
strategies, and that children who utilized more strategies had better 
memory performance than their same aged peers. 


Children may experience three deficiencies in their use of memory 
strategies. A 
mediation deficiency 
occurs when a child does not 
grasp the strategy being taught, and thus, does not benefit from its 
use. 


If you do not understand why using an acronym might be helpful, 
or how to create an acronym, the strategy is not likely to help 
you. In a 
production deficiency 
the child does not spontaneously 
use a memory strategy and must be prompted to do so. 
In this 
case, children know the strategy and are more than capable of 
using it, but they fail to “produce” the strategy on their own. For 
example, children might know how to make a list, but may fail to 
do this to help them remember what to bring on a family vacation. 
A 
utilization deficiency 
refers to children using an appropriate 
strategy, but it fails to aid their performance. Utilization deficiency 
is common in the early stages of learning a new memory strategy 
(Schneider & Pressley, 1997; Miller, 2000). Until the use of the 
strategy becomes automatic it may slow down the learning process, 
as space is taken up in memory by the strategy itself. Initially, 
children may get frustrated because their memory performance 
may seem worse when they try to use the new strategy. Once 
children become more adept at using the strategy, their memory 
performance will improve. 
Sodian 
and Schneider (1999) found that 
new memory strategies acquired prior to age eight often show 
utilization deficiencies with there being a gradual improvement in 
the child’s use of the strategy. In contrast, strategies acquired after 


this age often followed an “all-or-nothing” principle in which 
improvement was not gradual, but abrupt. 

Knowledge Base: During middle and late childhood, children are 
able to learn and remember due to an improvement in the ways they 
attend to and store information. As children enter school and learn 
more about the world, they develop more categories for concepts 
and learn more efficient strategies for storing and retrieving 
information. One significant reason is that they continue to have 
more experiences on which to tie new information. In other words, 
their 
knowledge base, 
knowledge in particular areas that makes 
learning new information easier, expands (Berger, 2014). 

Metacognition: 
Children in middle and late childhood also have a 
better understanding of how well they are performing a task, and 
the level of difficulty of a task. As they become more realistic about 
their abilities, they can adapt studying strategies to meet those 
needs. Young children spend as much time on an unimportant 
aspect of a problem as they do on the main point, while older 
children start to learn to prioritize and gauge what is significant 
and what is not. As a result, they develop 
metacognition. 
Metacognition 
refers to the knowledge we have 
about our own thinking and our ability to use this awareness to 
regulate our own cognitive processes 
(Bruning, Schraw, Norby, & 
Ronning, 2004). 

Critical Thinking: 
According to Bruning et al. (2004) there is a 
debate in U.S. education as to whether schools should teach 
students what to think or how to think. 
Critical thinking, or a 
detailed examination of beliefs, courses of action, and 
evidence, 
involves teaching children how to think. The purpose of 
critical thinking is to evaluate information in ways that help us make 
informed decisions. Critical thinking involves better understanding 
a problem through gathering, evaluating, and selecting information, 
and also by considering many possible solutions. Ennis (1987) 
identified several skills useful in critical thinking. These include: 


Analyzing arguments, clarifying information, judging the credibility 
of a source, making value judgements, and deciding on an action. 
Metacognition is essential to critical thinking because it allows us to 
reflect on the information as we make decisions. 

Language Development 

Vocabulary: One of the reasons that children can classify objects 
in so many ways is that they have acquired a vocabulary to do so. 
By fifth grade, a child’s vocabulary has grown to 40,000 words. It 
grows at a rate that exceeds that of those in early childhood. This 
language explosion, however, differs from that of younger children 
because it is facilitated by being able to associate new words with 
those already known, and because it is accompanied by a more 
sophisticated understanding of the meanings of a word. 

New Understanding: Those in middle and late childhood are also 
able to think of objects in less literal ways. For example, if asked 
for the first word that comes to mind when one hears the word 
“pizza”, the younger child is likely to say “eat” or some word that 
describes what is done with a pizza. However, the older child is 
more likely to place pizza in the appropriate category and say “food”. 
This sophistication of vocabulary is also evidenced by the fact that 
older children tell jokes and delight in doing do. They may use jokes 
that involve plays on words such as “knock- knock” jokes or jokes 
with punch lines. Young children do not understand play on words 
and tell “jokes” that are literal or slapstick, such as “A man fell down 
in the mud! Isn’t that funny?” 

Grammar and Flexibility: Older children are also able to learn new 
rules of grammar 
with more flexibility. While younger children are 
likely to be reluctant to give up saying “I 
goed 
there”, older children 
will learn this rather quickly along with other rules of 
grammar. 


Communication Disorders 

At the end of early childhood, children are often assessed in terms 
of their ability to speak properly. By first grade, about 5% of children 
have a notable speech disorder (Medline Plus, 2016c). 


Fluency disorders: 
Fluency disorders 
affect the rate of speech. 
Speech may be labored and slow, or too fast for listeners to follow. 
The most common fluency disorder is stuttering. 

Stuttering 
is a speech disorder in which sounds, syllables, or words 
are repeated or last longer than normal. These problems cause a 
break in the flow of speech, which is called dysfluency (Medline 
Plus, 2016b). About 5% of young children, aged two-five, will develop 
some stuttering that may last from several weeks to several years 
(Medline Plus, 2016c). 

Approximately 75% of children recover from stuttering. For the 
remaining 25%, stuttering can persist as a lifelong communication 
disorder (National Institute on Deafness and other Communication 
Disorders, NIDCD, 2016). This is called developmental stuttering and 
is the most common form of stuttering. Brain injury, and in very rare 
instances, emotional trauma may be other triggers for developing 
problems with stuttering. In most cases of developmental 
stuttering, other family members share the same communication 
disorder. Researchers have recently identified variants in four genes 
that are more commonly found in those who stutter (NIDCD, 2016). 


Articulation disorder: An 
articulation disorder 
refers to the 
inability to correctly produce speech sounds (phonemes) because of 
imprecise placement, timing, pressure, speed, or flow of movement 
of the lips, tongue, or throat 
(NIDCD, 2016). Sounds can be 
substituted, left off, added or changed. These errors may make it 
hard for people to understand the speaker. They can range from 
problems with specific sounds, such as lisping to severe impairment 
in the phonological system. Most children have problems 


pronouncing words early on while their speech is developing. 
However, by age three, at least half of what a child says should be 
understood by a stranger. By age five, a child’s speech should be 
mostly intelligible. Parents should seek help if by age six the child 
is still having trouble producing certain sounds. 
It 
should be noted 
that accents are not articulation disorders (Medline Plus, 
2016a). 

Voice disorders: 
Disorders of the voice 
involve problems with pitch, 
loudness, and quality of the voice 
(American Speech-Language and 
Hearing Association, 2016). 
It only becomes a disorder when 
problems with the voice makes the child unintelligible. In children, 
voice disorders are significantly more prevalent in males than in 
females. Between 1.4% and 6% of children experience problems 
with the quality of their voice. Causes can be due to structural 
abnormalities in the vocal cords and/or larynx, functional factors, 
such as vocal fatigue from overuse, and in rarer cases psychological 
factors, such as chronic stress and anxiety. 

Theories of Intelligence 

Psychologists have long debated how to best conceptualize and 
measure intelligence (Sternberg, 2003). These questions include: 
How many types of intelligence are there, the role of nature versus 
nurture in intelligence, how intelligence is represented in the brain, 
and the meaning of group differences in intelligence. 


General (g) versus Specific (s) Intelligences: 
From 1904-1905 the 
French psychologist Alfred Binet (1857–1914) and his colleague 
Théodore Simon (1872–1961) began working on behalf of the French 
government to develop a measure that would identify children who 
would not be successful with the regular school curriculum. The 
goal was to help teachers better educate these students (Aiken, 
1994). Binet and Simon developed what most psychologists today 
regard as the first intelligence test, which consisted of a wide 
variety of questions that included the ability to name objects, define 
words, draw pictures, complete sentences, compare items, and 
construct sentences. 


Binet and Simon (Binet, Simon, & Town, 1915; Siegler, 1992) believed 
that the questions they asked the children all assessed the basic 
abilities to understand, reason, and make judgments. It turned out 
that the correlations among these different types of measures were 
in fact all positive; that is, students who got one item correct were 


more likely to also get other items correct, even though the 
questions themselves were very different. 

On the basis of these results, the psychologist Charles Spearman 
(1863–1945) hypothesized that there must be a single underlying 
construct that all of these items measure. He called the construct 
that the different abilities and skills measured on intelligence tests 
have in common the General Intelligence Factor (g). Virtually all 
psychologists now believe that there is a generalized intelligence 
factor, “g”, that relates to abstract thinking and that includes the 
abilities to acquire knowledge, to reason abstractly, to adapt to 
novel situations, and to benefit from instruction and experience 
(Gottfredson, 1997; Sternberg, 2003). People with higher general 
intelligence learn faster. 

Soon after Binet and Simon introduced their test, the American 
psychologist Lewis Terman at Stanford University (1877–1956) 
developed an American version of Binet’s test that became known 
as the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Test. The Stanford- Binet is a 
measure of general intelligence made up of a wide variety of tasks, 
including vocabulary, memory for pictures, naming of familiar 
objects, repeating sentences, and following commands. 


Although there is general agreement among psychologists that “g” 
exists, there is also evidence for specific intelligence “s”, a measure 
of specific skills in narrow domains. One empirical result in support 
of the idea of “s” comes from intelligence tests themselves. Although 
the different types of questions do correlate with each other, some 
items correlate more highly with each other than do other items; 
they form clusters or clumps of intelligence. 

Triarchic Theory: One advocate of the idea of multiple intelligences 
is the psychologist Robert Sternberg. Sternberg has proposed a 
triarchic (three-part) theory of intelligence that proposes that 
people may display more or less analytical intelligence, creative 
intelligence, and practical intelligence. Sternberg (1985, 2003) 
argued that traditional intelligence tests assess analytical 
intelligence, academic problem solving and performing calculations, 


but that they do not typically assess creative intelligence, the ability 
to adapt to new situations and create new ideas, and/or practical 
intelligence, the ability to demonstrate common sense and street-
smarts. 


As Sternberg proposed, research has found that creativity is not 
highly correlated with analytical intelligence (Furnham & Bachtiar, 
2008) and exceptionally creative scientists, artists, mathematicians, 
and engineers do not score higher on intelligence than do their less, 
creative peers (Simonton, 2000). 


Furthermore, the brain areas that are associated with convergent 
thinking, thinking that is directed toward finding the correct answer 
to a given problem, are different from those associated with 
divergent thinking, the ability to generate many different ideas or 
solutions to a single problem (Tarasova, Volf, & Razoumnikova, 
2010). On the other hand, being creative often takes some of the 
basic abilities measured by “g”, including the abilities to learn from 
experience, to remember information, and to think abstractly (Bink 
& Marsh, 2000). Ericsson (1998), Weisberg (2006), Hennessey and 
Amabile (2010) and Simonton (1992) studied creative people and 


identified at least five components that are likely to be important 
for creativity as listed in Table 5.3 

Table 5.3 

The last aspect of the triarchic model, practical intelligence, refers 
primarily to intelligence that cannot be gained from books or formal 
learning. Practical intelligence represents a type of “street smarts” 
or “common sense” that is learned from life experiences. Although a 
number of tests have been devised to measure practical intelligence 
(Sternberg, Wagner, & 
Okagaki, 1993; Wagner & Sternberg, 1985), 
research has not found much evidence that practical intelligence is 
distinct from “g” or that it is predictive of success at any particular 
tasks (Gottfredson, 2003). 

Practical intelligence may include, at least in part, certain abilities 
that help people perform well at specific jobs, and these abilities 
may not always be highly correlated with general intelligence 
(Sternberg et al., 1993). 

Theory of Multiple Intelligences: 
Another champion of the idea of 
specific types of intelligences rather than one overall intelligence 
is the psychologist Howard Gardner (1983, 1999). Gardner argued 
that it would be evolutionarily functional for different people to 
have different talents and skills and proposed that there are eight 
intelligences that can be differentiated from each other. A potential 
ninth intelligence; that is, existential still needs empirical support. 
Gardner investigated intelligences by focusing on children who 


were talented in one or more areas and adults who suffered from 
strokes that compromised some capacities, but not others. Gardner 
also noted that some evidence for multiple intelligences comes from 
the abilities of autistic savants, people who score low on intelligence 
tests overall, but who nevertheless may have exceptional skills in a 
given domain, such as math, music, art, or in being 
able to recite 
statistics in a given sport (Treffert & Wallace, 2004). In addition to 
brain damage and the existence of savants, Gardner identified these 
8 intelligences based on other criteria including a set developmental 
history and psychometric findings. See Table 5.4 for a list of 
Gardner’s eight specific intelligences. 



Table 5.4 Howard Gardner’s Eight Specific 
Intelligences 

Intelligence 

Description 

Linguistic 

The ability to speak and 
write well 

Logical-mathematical 

The ability to use logic and 
mathematical skills to solve 
problems 

Spatial 

The ability to think and 
reason about objects in 
three dimensions 

Musical 

The ability to perform and 
enjoy music 

Kinesthetic (body) 

The ability to move the 
body in sports, dance, or 
other physical activities 

Interpersonal 

The ability to understand 
and interact effectively 
with others 

Intrapersonal 

The ability to have insight 
into the self 

Naturalistic 

The ability to recognize, 
identify, and understand 
animals, plants, and other 
living things 

Source: Adapted from Gardner, H. (1999). 
Intelligence reframed: Multiple 
intelligences for the 21st century. New 
York, NY: Basic Books. 



Table 5.4 

The idea of multiple intelligences has been influential in the field 
of education, and teachers have used these ideas to try to teach 


differently to different students. For instance, to teach math 
problems to students who have particularly good kinesthetic 
intelligence, a teacher might encourage the students to move their 
bodies or hands according to the numbers. On the other hand, 
some have argued that these “intelligences” sometimes seem more 
like “abilities” or “talents” rather than real intelligence. There is 
no clear conclusion about how many intelligences there are. Are 
sense of humor, artistic skills, dramatic skills, and so forth also 
separate intelligences? Furthermore, and again demonstrating the 
underlying power of a single intelligence, the many different 
intelligences are, in fact, correlated and thus represent, in part, “g” 
(Brody, 2003). 


Measuring Intelligence: Standardization and the 
Intelligence Quotient 


The goal of most intelligence tests is to measure “g”, the general 
intelligence factor. Good intelligence tests are reliable, meaning 
that they are consistent over time, and also demonstrate validity, 
meaning that they actually measure intelligence rather than 
something else. Because intelligence is such an important individual 
difference dimension, psychologists have invested substantial effort 
in creating and improving measures of intelligence, and these tests 
are now considered the most accurate of all psychological tests. In 
fact, the ability to accurately assess intelligence is one of the most 
important contributions of psychology to everyday public life. 

Intelligence changes with age. A 3-year-old who could accurately 
multiply 183 by 39 would certainly be intelligent, but a 25-year-
old who could not do so would be seen as unintelligent. Thus, 
understanding intelligence requires that we know the norms or 
standards in a given population of people at a given age. The 
standardization of a test involves giving it to a large number of 
people at different ages and computing the average score on the 
test at each age level. 

It is important that intelligence tests be standardized on a regular 
basis, because the overall level of intelligence in a population may 
change over time. The Flynn effect refers to the observation that 
scores on intelligence tests worldwide have increased substantially 
over the past decades (Flynn, 1999). Although the increase varies 
somewhat from country to country, the average increase is about 3 
IQ points every 10 years. There are many explanations for the Flynn 
effect, including better nutrition, increased access to information, 
and more familiarity with multiple-choice tests (Neisser, 1998). 
Whether people are actually getting smarter, however, is debatable 
(Neisser, 1997). Most of the increase in IQ occurred during the 
second half of the 20th century. Recent research has found a 
reversal of the Flynn effect in several nations around the world, 
although some nations still show an increase in IQ scores (Dutton, 
van der Linden, & Lynn, 2016). 

Once the standardization has been accomplished, we have a picture 


of the average abilities of people at different ages and can calculate 
a person’s mental age, which is the age at which a person is 
performing intellectually. If we compare the mental age of a person 
to the person’s chronological age, the result is the Intelligence 
Quotient (IQ), a measure of intelligence that is adjusted for age. A 
simple way to calculate IQ is by using the following formula: 

IQ = mental age ÷ chronological age × 100. 

Thus a 10-year-old child who does as well as the average 10-year-
old child has an IQ of 100 (10÷ 10 × 100), whereas an 8-year-old child 
who does as well as the average 10-year-old child would have an IQ 
of 125 (10 ÷ 8 × 100). Most modern intelligence tests are based on 
the relative position of a person’s score among people of the same 
age, rather than on the basis of this formula, but the idea of an 
intelligence “ratio” or “quotient” provides a good description of the 
score’s meaning. 

Wechsler Scales: 
A number of scales are based on the IQ. The 
Wechsler Adult lntelligence Scale (WAIS) is the most widely used 
intelligence test for adults (Watkins, Campbell, Nieberding, & 
Hallmark, 1995). The current version of the WAIS, the WAIS-IV, was 
standardized on 2,200 people ranging from 16 to 90 years of age. It 
consists of 15 different tasks, each designed to assess intelligence, 
including working memory, arithmetic ability, spatial ability, and 
general knowledge about the world. The WAIS-IV yield scores on 
four domains: verbal, perceptual, working memory, and processing 
speed. The reliability of the test is high (more than 0.95), and it 
shows substantial construct validity. The WAIS-IV is correlated 
highly with other IQ tests such as the Stanford-Binet, as well as 
with criteria of academic and life success, including college grades, 
measures of work performance, and occupational level. It also 
shows significant correlations with measures of everyday 
functioning among people with intellectual disabilities. 

The Wechsler scale has also been adapted for preschool children 


in the form of the Wechsler Primary and Preschool Scale of 
Intelligence-Fourth Edition (WPPSI-IV) and for older children and 
adolescents in the form of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 
Children-Fifth Edition (WISC-V). Figure 5.11 illustrates items from 
the WAIS. 

Figure 5.11 

Bias: Intelligence tests and psychological definitions of intelligence 
have been heavily criticized since the 1970s for being biased in 
favor of Anglo-American, middle-class respondents and for being 
inadequate tools for measuring non-academic types of intelligence 
or talent. Intelligence changes with experience, and intelligence 
quotients or scores do not reflect that ability to change. What is 
considered smart varies culturally as well, and most intelligence 
tests do not take this variation into account. For example, in the 
West, being smart is associated with being quick. A person who 
answers a question the fastest is seen as the smartest, but in some 
cultures being smart is associated with considering an idea 
thoroughly before giving an answer. A well- thought out, the 
contemplative answer is the best answer. 


Extremes of Intelligence: Intellectual Disability 
and Giftedness 

The results of studies assessing the measurement of intelligence 
show that IQ is distributed in the population in the form of a normal 
distribution (or bell curve), which is the pattern of scores usually 
observed in a variable that clusters around its average. In a normal 
distribution, the bulk of the scores fall toward the middle, with 
fewer scores falling at the extremes. The normal distribution of 
intelligence shows that on IQ tests, as well as on most other 
measures, the majority of people cluster around the average (in this 
case, where IQ = 100), and fewer are either very smart or very dull 
(see Figure 5.13). Because the standard deviation of an IQ test is 
about 15, this means that about 2% of people score above an IQ of 
130, often considered the threshold for giftedness, and about the 
same percentage score below an IQ of 70, often being considered 
the threshold for intellectual disability. 

Although Figure 5.12 presents a single distribution, the actual IQ 
distribution varies by sex such that the distribution for men is more 
spread out than is the distribution for women. These sex differences 
mean that about 20% more men than women fall in the extreme 
(very smart or very dull) ends of the distribution (Johnson, 
Carothers, & Deary, 2009). Boys are about five times more likely 
to be diagnosed with the reading disability dyslexia than are girls 
(Halpern, 1992), and are also more likely to be classified as having an 
intellectual disability. However, boys are also about 20% more highly 
represented in the upper end of the IQ distribution. 

Figure 5.12 


One end of the distribution of intelligence scores is defined by 
people with very low IQ. Intellectual disability (or intellectual 
developmental disorder) is assessed based on cognitive capacity (IQ) 
and adaptive functioning. The severity of the disability is based on 
adaptive functioning, or how well the person handles everyday life 
tasks. About 1% of the United States population, most of them males, 
fulfill the criteria for the intellectual developmental disorder, but 
some children who are given this diagnosis lose the classification as 
they get older and better learn to function in society. A particular 
vulnerability of people with low IQ is that they may be taken 
advantage of by others, and this is an important aspect of the 
definition of intellectual developmental disorder (Greenspan, 
Loughlin, & Black, 2001). 

One cause of the intellectual developmental disorder is Down 
syndrome, a chromosomal disorder caused by the presence of all or 
part of an extra 21st chromosome. The incidence of Down syndrome 
is estimated at approximately 1 per 700 births, and the prevalence 
increases as the mother’s age increases (CDC, 2014). People with 
Down syndrome typically exhibit a distinctive pattern of physical 
features, including a flat nose, upwardly slanted eyes, a protruding 
tongue, and a short neck (see Figure 5.14). 

Fortunately, societal attitudes toward individuals with intellectual 


disabilities have changed over the past decades. Laws such as the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) have made it illegal to 
discriminate on the basis of mental and physical disability, and there 
has been a trend to bring people with intellectual disabilities out of 
institutions and into our workplaces and schools. 

Giftedness refers to children who have an IQ of 130 or higher (Lally 
& Valentine-French, 2015). Having extremely high IQ is clearly less 
of a problem than having extremely low IQ, but there may also 
be challenges to being particularly smart. It is often assumed that 
schoolchildren who are labeled as “gifted” may have adjustment 
problems that make it more difficult for them to create social 
relationships. To study gifted children, Lewis Terman and his 
colleagues (Terman & Oden, 1959) selected about 1,500 high school 
students who scored in the top 1% on the 
Stanford-Binet and similar 
IQ tests (i.e., who had IQs of about 135 or higher), and tracked them 
for more than seven decades (the children became known as the 
“termites” and are still being studied today). This study found that 
these students were not unhealthy or poorly adjusted, but rather 
were above average in physical health and were taller and heavier 
than individuals in the general population. The students also had 


above-average social relationships and were less likely to divorce 
than the average person (Seagoe, 1975). 


Terman’s study also found that many of these students went on 
to achieve high levels of education and entered prestigious 
professions, including medicine, law, and science. Of the sample, 
7% earned doctoral degrees, 4% earned medical degrees, and 6% 
earned law degrees. 

These numbers are all considerably higher than what would have 
been expected from a more general population. Another study of 
young adolescents who had even higher IQs found that these 
students ended up attending graduate school at a rate more than 
50 times higher than that in the general population (Lubinski & 
Benbow, 2006). 

As you might expect based on our discussion of intelligence, kids 
who are gifted have higher scores on general intelligence “g”, but 
there are also different types of giftedness. Some children are 


particularly good at math or science, some at automobile repair or 
carpentry, some at music or art, some at sports or leadership, and 
so on. There is a lively debate among scholars about whether it 
is appropriate or beneficial to label some children as “gifted and 
talented” in school and to provide them with accelerated special 
classes and other programs that are not available to everyone. 
Although doing so may help the gifted kids (Colangelo & Assouline, 
2009), it also may isolate them from their peers and make such 
provisions unavailable to those who are not classified as “gifted.” 

Education 

Remember the ecological systems model (Bronfenbrenner, 1979) 
that we explored in chapter one? This model helps us understand 
an individual by examining the contexts in which the person lives 
and the direct and indirect influences on that person’s life. School 
becomes a very important component of children’s lives during 
middle and late childhood, and parents and the culture contribute 
to children’s experiences in school as indicated by the ecological 
systems model through their interaction with the school. 

Gender: 
The stereotypes held by parents and teachers can 
influence children’s self-efficacy in various domains. For example, 
teachers who hold the view that girls are better at reading 
(Retelsdorf, Schwartz, & Asbrock, 2015) or boys are better at math 
(Plante, de la Sablonnière, Aronson, & Théorêt, 2013) often find that 
their students’ performance in these areas mirror these stereotypes, 
despite the children’s actual ability, or the ability of children in the 
classrooms of teachers who do not hold such stereotypes. While not 
all children will internalize the views of others, those who do are 
more likely to show declines in their performance consistent with 
the stereotypes (Plante, et al., 2013; Retelsdorf et al., 2015). 

Parental Involvement in School: 
Parents vary in their level of 


involvement with their children’s schools. Teachers often complain 
that they have difficulty getting parents to participate in their child’s 
education and devise a variety of techniques to keep parents in 
touch with daily and overall progress. For example, parents may 
be required to sign a behavior chart each evening to be returned 
to school or may be given information about the school’s events 
through websites and newsletters. There are other factors that need 
to be considered when looking at parental involvement. To explore 
these, first ask yourself if all parents who enter the school with 
concerns about their child be received in the same way? 

Horvat (2004) found that teachers seek a particular type of 
involvement from particular types of parents. While teachers 
thought they were open and neutral in their responses to parental 
involvement, in reality teachers were most receptive to support, 
praise and agreement coming from parents who were most similar 
in race and social class with the teachers. Parents who criticized 
the school or its policies were less likely to be given voice. Parents 
who have higher levels of income, occupational status, and other 
qualities favored in society have family capital. This is a form of 
power that can be used to improve a child’s education. Parents 
who do not have these qualities may find it more difficult to be 
effectively involved. The authors suggest that teachers closely 
examine their biases against parents. Schools may also need to 
examine their 
ability to dialogue with parents about school policies 
in more open ways. Any efforts to improve effective parental 
involvement should address these concerns. 


Cultural Differences in the Classroom 

Bilingualism: In 2013, approximately 20% of school aged children 
and adolescents spoke a language other than English in the home 
(Camarota & Zeigler, 2014). The majority of bilingual students speak 


Spanish, but the rest represent more than three hundred different 
language groups from around the world. In 
larger communities 
throughout the United States, it is therefore common for a single 
classroom to contain students from several language backgrounds 
at once. In classrooms, as in other social settings, bilingualism exists 
in different forms and degrees. At one extreme are students who 
speak both English and another language fluently; at the other 
extreme are those who speak only limited versions of both 
languages. In between are students who speak their home (or 
heritage) language much better than English, as well as others who 
have partially lost their heritage language in the process of learning 
English (Tse, 2001). Commonly, a student 
may 
speak a language 
satisfactorily, but be challenged by reading or writing it. Whatever 
the case, each bilingual student poses unique challenges to 
teachers. 


The student who speaks both languages fluently has a definite 


cognitive advantage. As you might suspect, and research confirms, 
a fully fluent bilingual student is in a better position to express 
concepts or ideas in more than one way, and to be aware of doing 
so (Jimenez, Garcia, & Pearson, 1995; Francis, 2006). Unfortunately, 
the bilingualism of many students is unbalanced in the sense that 
they are either still learning English, or else they have lost some 
earlier ability to use their original, heritage language. Losing one’s 
original language is a concern as research finds that language loss 
limits students’ ability to learn English as well or as quickly as they 
could do. Having a large vocabulary in a first language has been 
shown to save time in learning vocabulary in a second language 
(Hansen, Umeda & McKinney, 2002). Preserving the first language 
is important if a student has impaired skill in all languages and 
therefore needs intervention or help from a speech-language 
specialist. Research has found, in such cases, that the specialist can 
be more effective if the specialist speaks and uses the first language 
as well as English (Kohnert, Yim, Nett, Kan, & Duran, 2005). 


Cultures and ethnic groups differ not only in languages, but also 
in how languages are used. Since some of the patterns differ from 
those typical of modern classrooms, they can create 
misunderstandings between teachers and students (Cazden, 2001; 
Rogers, et al., 2005). Consider these examples: 

In some cultures, it is considered polite or even intelligent not 
to speak unless you have something truly important to say. 
Chitchat, or talk that simply affirms a personal tie between 
people, is considered immature or intrusive (Minami, 2002). In 
a classroom, this habit can make it easier for a child to learn 
not to interrupt others, but it can also make 
the child 
seem 
unfriendly. 
Eye contact varies by culture. In many African American and 
Latin American communities, it is considered appropriate and 
respectful for a child not to look directly at an adult who is 
speaking to them (Torres-Guzman, 1998). In classrooms, 
however, teachers often expect a lot of eye contact (as in “I 
want all eyes on me!”) and may be tempted to construe lack of 
eye contact as a sign of indifference or disrespect. 
Social distance varies by culture. In some cultures, it is 
common to stand relatively close when having a conversation; 
in others, it is more customary to stand relatively far apart 
(Beaulieu, 2004). Problems may happen when a teacher and a 
student prefer different social distances. A student who 
expects a closer distance than does the teacher may seem 
overly familiar or intrusive, whereas one who expects a longer 
distance may seem overly formal or hesitant. 
Wait time varies by culture. Wait time is the gap between the 
end of one person’s comment or question and the next 
person’s reply or answer. In some cultures wait time is 
relatively long, as long as three or four seconds (Tharp & 
Gallimore, 1989). In others it is a negative gap, meaning that it 
is acceptable, even expected, for a person to interrupt before 
the end of the previous comment. In classrooms the wait time 



is customarily about one second; after that, the teacher is 
likely to move on to another question or to another student. A 
student who habitually expects a wait time longer than one 
second may seem hesitant, and not be given many chances to 
speak. A student who expects a negative wait time, on the 
other hand, may seem overeager or even rude. 
In most non-Anglo cultures, questions are intended to gain 
information, and it is assumed that a person asking the 
question truly does not have the information requested 
(Rogoff, 2003). In most classrooms, however, teachers regularly 
ask test questions, which are questions to which the teacher 
already knows the answer and that simply assess whether a 
student knows the answer as well (Macbeth, 2003). The 
question: “How much is 2 + 2?” for example, is a test question. 
If the student is not aware of this purpose, he or she may 
become confused, or think that the teacher is surprisingly 
ignorant. Worse yet, the student may feel that the teacher is 
trying deliberately to shame the student by revealing the 
student’s ignorance or incompetence to others. 


Preference for activities that are cooperative rather than 



competitive. Many activities in school are competitive, even 
when teachers try to de-emphasize the competition. Once 
past the first year or second year of school, students often 
become attentive to who receives the highest marks on an 
assignment, for example, or who is the best athlete at various 
sports or whose contributions to class discussions gets the 
most verbal recognition from the teacher (Johnson & Johnson, 
1998). A teacher deliberately organizes important activities or 
assignments competitively, as in “Let’s see who finishes the 
math sheet first”. Classroom life can then become explicitly 
competitive, and the competitive atmosphere can interfere 
with cultivating supportive relationships among students or 
between students and the teacher (Cohen, 2004). For students 
who give priority to these relationships, competition can seem 
confusing at best and threatening at worst. A student may 
wonder, “What sort of sharing or helping with answers is 
allowed?” The answer to this question may be different 
depending on the cultural background of the student and 
teacher. What the student views as cooperative sharing may be 
seen by the teacher as laziness, freeloading, or even cheating. 


Figure 5.1 


Children with Disabilities 

A 
Learning Disability 
(or LD) 
is a specific impairment of academic 
learning that interferes with a specific aspect of schoolwork and 
that reduces a student’s academic performance 
significantly. 
A 
LD 
shows itself as a major discrepancy between a 
student’s ability and some feature of achievement: The student may 
be delayed in reading, writing, listening, speaking, or doing 
mathematics, but not in all of these at once. A learning problem 
is not considered a learning disability if it stems from physical, 
sensory, or motor handicaps, or from generalized intellectual 
impairment. It is also not an 
LD 
if the learning problem really 
reflects the challenges of learning English as a second language. 
Genuine LDs are the learning problems left over after these other 
possibilities are accounted for or excluded. Typically, a student with 
an LD has not been helped by teachers’ ordinary efforts to assist 
the student when he or she falls behind academically, though what 
counts as an “ordinary effort”, of course, differs among teachers, 


a fairly specific area of academic learning. A student may be able 
write. LDs are by far the most common form of special educational 
United States and approximately 20% of all students, depending 
on how the numbers are estimated (National Center for Learning 
Disabilities, 2017). Students with LDs are so common, in fact, that 
most teachers regularly encounter at least one per class in any given 
schools, and students. Most importantly, though, an LD relates to 
to read and compute well enough, for example, but 
not be able to 
need, accounting for half of all students with special needs in the 
school year, regardless of the grade level they 
teach. 

These difficulties are identified in school because this is when 
children’s academic abilities are being tested, compared, and 
measured. Consequently, once academic testing is no longer 
essential in that person’s life (as when they are working rather than 
going to school) these disabilities may no longer be noticed or 
relevant, depending on the person’s job and the extent of the 
disability. 

Dyslexia is one of the most commonly diagnosed disabilities and 
involves having difficulty in the area of reading. This diagnosis is 
used for a number of reading difficulties. Common characteristics 
are difficulty with phonological processing, which includes the 
manipulation of sounds, spelling, and rapid visual/verbal 
processing. Additionally, the child may reverse letters, have 
difficulty reading from left to right, or may have problems 
associating letters with sounds. It appears to be rooted in 
neurological problems involving the parts of the brain active in 
recognizing letters, verbally responding, or being able to manipulate 
sounds. 
Recent studies have identified a number of genes that are 
linked to developing dyslexia (National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke, 2016). Treatment typically involves altering 
teaching methods to accommodate the person’s particular 
problematic area. 

Dysgraphia refers to a writing disability that is often associated with 


dyslexia (Carlson, 2013). There are different types of dysgraphia, 
including phonological dysgraphia when the person cannot sound 
out words and write them phonetically. Orthographic dysgraphia is 
demonstrated by those individuals who can spell regularly spelled 
words, but not irregularly spelled ones. Some individuals with 
dysgraphia experience difficulties in motor control and experience 
trouble forming letters when using a pen or pencil. 

Dyscalculia refers to problems in math. Cowan and Powell (2014) 
identified several terms used when describing difficulties in 
mathematics including dyscalculia, mathematical learning disability, 
and mathematics disorder. All three terms refer to students with 
average intelligence who exhibit poor academic performance in 
mathematics. When evaluating a group of third graders, Cowan and 
Powell (2014) found that children with dyscalculia demonstrated 
problems with working memory, reasoning, processing speed and 
oral language, all of which are referred to as domain-general factors. 
Additionally, problems with multi-digit skills, including number 
system knowledge, were also exhibited. 


A child with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) shows 
a constant pattern of inattention and/or hyperactive and impulsive 
behavior that interferes with normal functioning (American 
Psychological Association (APA), 2013). Some of the signs of 
inattention include great difficulty with, and avoidance of, tasks 
that require sustained attention (such as conversations or reading), 
failure to follow instructions (often resulting in failure to complete 
schoolwork and other duties), disorganization (difficulty keeping 
things in order, poor time management, sloppy and messy work), 
lack of attention to detail, becoming easily distracted, and 
forgetfulness. Hyperactivity is characterized by excessive 
movement and includes fidgeting or squirming, leaving one’s seat 
in situations when remaining seated is expected, having trouble 
sitting still (e.g., in a restaurant), running about and climbing on 
things, blurting out responses before another person’s question or 
statement has been completed, difficulty waiting for one’s turn for 
something, and interrupting and intruding on others. Frequently, 
the hyperactive child comes across as noisy and boisterous. The 
child’s behavior is hasty, impulsive, and seems to occur without 
much forethought; these characteristics may explain why 
adolescents and young adults diagnosed with ADHD receive more 
traffic tickets and have more automobile accidents than do others 
their age (Thompson, Molina, Pelham, & Gnagy, 2007). 

ADHD occurs in about 5% of children (APA, 2013). On average, boys 
are 3 times more likely to have ADHD than are girls; however, such 
findings might reflect the greater propensity of boys to engage 
in aggressive and antisocial behavior and thus incur a greater 
likelihood of being referred to psychological clinics (Barkley, 2006). 
Children with ADHD face severe academic and social challenges. 
Compared to their non-ADHD counterparts, children with ADHD 
have lower grades and standardized test scores and higher rates 
of expulsion, grade retention, and dropping out. They also are less 
well-liked and more often rejected by their peers (Hoza et al., 2005). 


ADHD can persist into adolescence and adulthood (Barkley, Fischer, 
Smallish, & Fletcher, 2002). A recent study found that 29.3% of 
adults who had been diagnosed with ADHD decades earlier still 
showed symptoms (Barbaresi et al., 2013). Somewhat troubling, this 
study also reported that nearly 81% of those whose ADHD persisted 
into adulthood had experienced at least one other comorbid 
disorder, compared to 47% of those whose ADHD did not persist. 
Additional concerns when an adult has ADHD include Worse 
educational attainment, lower socioeconomic status, less likely to 
be employed, more likely to be divorced, and more likely to have 
non-alcohol-related substance abuse problems (Klein et al., 2012). 

Etiology of ADHD: 
Family and twin studies indicate that genetics 
play a significant role in the development of ADHD. Burt 
(2009), in a 
review of 26 studies, reported that the median rate of concordance 
for identical twins was .66, whereas the median concordance rate 
for fraternal twins was .20. The specific genes involved in 
ADHD 
are thought to include at least two that are important in 
the regulation of the neurotransmitter dopamine (Gizer, Ficks, 
& 
Waldman, 2009), suggesting that dopamine may be important in 
ADHD. Indeed, medications used in the treatment of ADHD, such 


as methylphenidate (Ritalin) and amphetamine with 
dextroamphetamine (Adderall), have stimulant qualities and elevate 
dopamine activity. People with ADHD show less dopamine activity in 
key regions of the brain, especially those associated with motivation 
and reward (Volkow et al., 2009), which provides support to the 
theory that dopamine deficits may be a vital factor in the 
development this disorder (Swanson et al., 2007). 

Brain imaging studies have shown that children with ADHD exhibit 
abnormalities in their frontal lobes, an area in which dopamine is in 
abundance. Compared to children without ADHD, those with ADHD 
appear to have smaller frontal lobe volumes, and they show less 
frontal lobe activation when performing mental tasks (Banaschewski 
et al., 2017). Recall that one of the functions of the frontal lobes is 
to inhibit our behavior. Thus, abnormalities in this region may go a 
long way toward explaining the hyperactive, uncontrolled behavior 
of ADHD. 

Many parents attribute their child’s hyperactivity to sugar. A 
statistical review of 16 studies, however, concluded that sugar 
consumption has no effect at all on the behavioral and cognitive 
performance of children (Wolraich, Wilson, & White, 1995). 
Additionally, although food additives have been shown to increase 
hyperactivity in non-ADHD children, the effect is rather small 
(McCann et al., 2007). Numerous studies, however, have shown a 
significant relationship between exposure to nicotine in cigarette 
smoke during the prenatal period and ADHD (Linnet et al., 2003; 
Sourander et al., 2019). Maternal smoking during pregnancy is also 
associated with the development of more severe symptoms of the 
disorder (Thakuretal., 2013). Additionally, low birth weight and 
prematurity have been correlated with ADHD (Banaschewski et al., 
2017). 

Treatment for ADHD: Recommended treatment for ADHD includes 
behavioral interventions, cognitive behavioral therapy, parent and 
teacher education, recreational programs, and lifestyle changes, 


such as getting more sleep (Clay, 2013). For some children, 
medication is prescribed. Parents are often concerned that 
stimulant medication may result in their child acquiring a substance 
use disorder. However, research using longitudinal studies has 
demonstrated that children diagnosed with ADHD who received 
pharmacological treatment had a lower risk for substance abuse 
problems than those children who did not receive medication 
(Wilens, Fararone, Biederman, & Gunawardene, 2003). The risk of 
substance abuse problems appears to be even greater for those with 
ADHD who are un-medicated and also exhibit antisocial tendencies 
(Marshal & Molina, 2006). 

Is the prevalence rate of ADHD increasing? Many people believe 
that the rates of ADHD have increased in recent years, and there is 
evidence to support this contention. In a recent study, investigators 
found that the parent-reported prevalence of ADHD among 
children (4–17 years old) in the United States increased by 22% 
during a 4-year period, from 7.8% in 2003 to 9.5% in 2007 (CDC, 
2010). ADHD may be over-diagnosed by doctors who are too quick 
to medicate children as behavior treatment. There is also greater 
awareness of ADHD now than in the past. Nearly everyone has 
heard of ADHD, and most parents and teachers are aware of its 
key symptoms. Thus, parents may be quick to take their children 
to a doctor if they believe their child possesses these symptoms, 
or teachers may be more likely now than in the past to notice the 
symptoms and refer the child for evaluation. Further, the use of 
computers, video games, iPhones, and other electronic devices has 
become pervasive among children in the early 21st century, and 
these devices could potentially shorten children’s attention spans. 

Thus, what might seem like inattention to some parents and 
teachers could simply reflect exposure to too much technology. 


Children with Disabilities: Legislation 

Since the 1970s political and social attitudes have moved 
increasingly toward including people with disabilities into a wide 
variety of “regular” activities. In the United States, the shift is 
illustrated clearly in the Federal legislation that was enacted during 
this time. Three major laws were passed that guaranteed the rights 
of persons with disabilities, and of children and students with 
disabilities in particular. The third law has had the biggest impact on 
education. 

Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 504: This law, the first of its kind, 
required that individuals with disabilities be accommodated in any 
program or activity that receives Federal funding (PL 93-112, 1973). 
Although this law was not intended specifically for education, in 
practice it has protected students’ rights in some extra-curricular 
activities (for older students) and in some child care or after-school 
care programs (for younger students). If those programs receive 
Federal funding of any kind, the programs are not allowed to 
exclude children or youths with disabilities, and they have to find 
reasonable ways to accommodate the individuals’ disabilities. 

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (or ADA): This legislation 
also prohibited discrimination on the basis of disability, just as 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act had done (PL 101-336, 1990). 
Although the ADA also applies to all people (not just to students), 
its provisions are more specific and “stronger” than those of Section 
504. In particular, ADA extends to all employment and jobs, not 
just those receiving Federal funding. It also specifically requires 
accommodations to be made in public facilities such as with buses, 
restrooms, and telephones. ADA legislation is therefore responsible 
for some of the “minor” renovations in schools that you may have 
noticed in recent years, like wheelchair-accessible doors, ramps, 
and restrooms, and public telephones with volume controls. 


Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (or IDEA): As its name 
implied, this legislation was more focused on education than either 
Section 504 or ADA. It was first passed in 1975, reauthorized in 2004 
(PL 108-446, 2004), and most recently amended in 2015 through 
Public Law 114-95, as 
the Every 
Student Succeeds Act (United States 
Department of Education, 2017). In its current form, the law 
guarantees the following rights related to education for anyone with 
a disability from birth to age 21. The first two influence schooling 
in general, but the last three affect the work of classroom teachers 
rather directly: 

Free, appropriate education: An individual or an individual’s 
family should not have 
to pay for education simply because the 
individual has a disability, and the educational program should 
be truly educational; i.e., not merely care-taking or babysitting 
the person. 


Due process: 
In case of disagreements between an individual 
with a disability and the schools or other professionals, there 
must be procedures for resolving the 
disagreements that are 
fair and accessible to all parties, including the person himself 
or herself or the person’s 
representative. 
A fair evaluation of performance in spite of disability: Tests 
or other evaluations should not assume test-taking skills that a 
person with a disability cannot reasonably be expected to have, 
such as holding a pencil, hearing or seeing questions, working 
quickly, or understanding and speaking orally. Evaluation 
procedures should be modified to allow for these differences. 
This provision of the law applies both to evaluations made by 
teachers and to school-wide or “high-stakes” 
testing 
programs. 
Education in the “least restrictive environment”: Education 
for someone with a disability should provide as many 
educational opportunities and options for the person as 
possible, both in the short term and in the long term. In 



practice, this requirement has meant including students in 
regular classrooms and school activities as much as possible, 
though often not totally. 
An individualized educational program (IEP): Given that every 
disability is unique, instructional planning for a person with a 
disability should be unique or individualized as well. In practice 
this provision has led to classroom teachers planning 
individualized programs jointly with other professionals (like 
reading specialists, psychologists, or medical personnel) as 
part of a team. 


Evaluation and diagnosis can be the first step in helping provide 
children with disabilities the type of instruction and resources that 
will benefit them educationally, but diagnosis and labeling also have 
social implications. It is important to consider that children can 
be misdiagnosed and that once a child has received a diagnostic 
label, the child, teachers, and family members may tend to interpret 
actions of the child through that label. The label can also influence 
the child’s self-concept. Consider, for example, a child who is 
misdiagnosed as learning disabled. That child may expect to have 
difficulties in school, lack confidence, and because of these 
expectations experience trouble. This self-fulfilling prophecy or 
tendency to act in such a way as to make what you predict will 
happen, will come true. 

This calls our attention to the power that labels can have whether 
or not they are accurately applied. It is also important to consider 
that children’s difficulties can change over time; a child who has 
problems in school, may improve later or may live under 
circumstances as an adult where the problem (such as a delay in 
math skills or reading skills) is no longer relevant. That person, 
however, will still have a label as learning disabled. It should be 
recognized that the distinction between abnormal and normal 
behavior is not always clear; some abnormal behavior in children is 
fairly common. 


References 

Aiken, L. R. (1994). Psychological testing and assessment (8th ed.). 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 

Alloway, T. P. (2009). Working memory, but not IQ, predicts 
subsequent learning in children with learning difficulties. 
European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 25, 92-98. 

Alloway, T. P., Bibile, V., & Lau, G. (2013). Computerized working 
memory training: Can lead to gains in cognitive skills in students? 
Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 632-638. 

American Civil Liberties Union (2016). Overview of lesbian and gay 
parenting, adoption and foster care. Retrieved from 
https://www.aclu.org/fact-sheet/overview-lesbian-and-gay-
parenting-adoption-and-foster-care?redirect=overviewlesbian-
and-gay-parenting-adoption-and-foster-care 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Association. 

American Speech-Language and Hearing Association. (2016). Voice 
disorders. Retrieved from http://www.asha.org/PracticePortal/
Clinical-Topics/Voice-Disorders/ Arditti, J. A. (1999). Rethinking 
relationships between divorced mothers and their children: 
Capitalizing on family strengths. Family Relations, 48, 109-119. 

Anderson, J. (2018). The impact of family structure on the health of 
children: Effects of divorce. The Linacre Quarterly 81(4), 378–387. 

Arkowicz, H., & Lilienfeld. (2013). Is divorce bad for children? 
Scientific American Mind, 24(1), 68-69. Figure 5.27 206 

Asher, S. R., & Hymel, S. (1981). Children’s social competence in peer 
relations: Sociometric and behavioral assessment. In J. K. Wine 
& M. D. Smye (Eds.), Social competence (pp. 125-157). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Banaschewski, T., Becker, K., Döpfner, M., Holtmann, M., Rösler, M., 
& Romanos, M. (2017). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. A 
current overview. Deutsches Ärzteblatt International, 114, 149-159. 


Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of 
behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84, 191-215. 

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social 
cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: 
Freeman. 

Barnett, N. P., Smoll, F. L., & Smith, R. E. (1992). Effects of enhancing 
coach-athlete relationships on youth sport attrition. The Sport 
Psychologist, 6, 111-127. 

Barbaresi, W. J., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L., Voigt, R. G., Killian, 
J. M., & Katusic, S. K. (2013). Mortality, ADHD, and psychosocial 
adversity in adults with childhood ADHD: A prospective study. 
Pediatrics, 131, 637–644. 

Barkley, R. A. (2006). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A 
handbook for diagnosis and treatment. New York, NY: Guilford 
Press. 

Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Smallish, L., & Fletcher, K. (2002). The 
persistence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder into 
young adulthood as a function of reporting source and definition 
of disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 279–289. 

Beaulieu, C. (2004). Intercultural study of personal space: A case 
study. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(4), 794-805. 

Berk, L. (2007). Development through the life span (4th ed.). Boston: 
Allyn and Bacon. Berger, K. S. (2014). The developing person: 
Through the life span. NY: Worth Publishers. 

Bigelow, B. J. (1977). Children’s friendship expectations: A cognitive 
developmental study. Child Development, 48, 246–253. 

Bigelow, B. J., & La Gaipa, J. J. (1975). Children’s written descriptions 
of friendship: A multidimensional analysis. Developmental 
Psychology, 11(6), 857-858. 

Binet, A., Simon, T., & Town, C. H. (1915). A method of measuring 
the development of the intelligence of young children (3rd ed.) 
Chicago, IL: Chicago Medical Book. 

Bink, M. L., & Marsh, R. L. (2000). Cognitive regularities in creative 
activity. Review of General Psychology, 4(1), 59–78. 


Bjorklund, D. F. (2005). Children’s thinking: Developmental function 
and individual differences (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Black, J. A., Park, M., Gregson, J. (2015). Child obesity cut-offs as 
derived from parental perceptions: Cross-sectional 
questionnaire. British Journal of General Practice, 65, e234-e239. 

Boulton, M. J. (1999). Concurrent and longitudinal relations between 
children’s playground behavior and social preference, 
victimization, and bullying. Child Development, 70, 944-954. 

Brody, N. (2003). Construct validation of the Sternberg Triarchic 
Abilities Test: Comment and reanalysis. Intelligence, 31(4), 
319–329. 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: 
Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
Univeristy Press. 

Brown, S. L. (2000). Union transitions among cohabitors: The 
significance of relationship assessments and expectations. 
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 833-846. 207 

Bruning, R. H., Schraw, G. J., Norby, M. M., & Ronning, R. R. (2004). 
Cognitive psychology and instruction. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson. 

Burt, S. A. (2009). Rethinking environmental contributions to child 
and adolescent psychopathology: A meta-analysis of shared 
environmental influences. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 608–637. 

Carlson, N. (2013). Physiology of behavior. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education. 

Carlson, S. M., & Zelazo, P. D., & Faja, S. (2013). Executive function. 
In P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of developmental 
psychology, Vol. 1: Body and mind (pp. 706-743). New York: Oxford 
University Press 

Camarota, S. A., & Zeigler, K. (2015). One in five U. S. residents speaks 
foreign language at home. Retrieved from https://cis.org/sites/
default/files/camarota-language-15.pdf 

Cazden, C. (2001). Classroom discourse, (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, NH: 
Heineman Publishers. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). 2000 CDC 


growth charts for the United States: Methods and development. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_11/
sr11_246.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2010, November 12). 
Increasing prevalence of parent reported attentiondeficit/
hyperactivity disorder among children, United States, 2003–2007. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 59(44), 1439–1443. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Birth defects. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/
downsyndrome/data.html 

Chao, R. (2001). Extending research on the consequences of 
parenting styles for Chinese Americans and European Americans. 
Child Development, 72, 1832-1843. 

Cillesen, A. H., & Mayeaux, L. (2004). From censure to reinforcement: 
Developmental changes in the association between aggression 
and social status. Child Development, 75, 147-163. 

Clark, M. L., & Bittle, M. L. (1992). Friendship expectations and the 
evaluation of present friendships in middle childhood and early 
adolescence. Child Study Journal, 22, 115–135. 

Clay, R. A. (2013). Psychologists are using research-backed 
behavioral interventions that effectively treat children with 
ADHD. Monitor on Psychology, 44(2), 45-47. 

Cohen, E. (2004). Teaching cooperative learning: The challenge for 
teacher education. Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Press. 

Colangelo, N., & Assouline, S. (2009). Acceleration: Meeting the 
academic and social needs of students. In T. Balchin, B. Hymer, & 
D. J. Matthews (Eds.), The Routledge international companion to 
gifted education (pp. 194–202). New York, NY: Routledge. 

Cowan, R., & Powell, D. (2014). The contributions of domain-general 
and numerical factors to third-grade arithmetic skills and 
mathematical learning disability. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 106, 214-229. 

Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development (5th ed.). Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson. 


Davidson, T. L. (2014). Do impaired memory and body weight 
regulation originate in childhood with diet-induced hippocampal 
dysfunction? The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 99(5), 
971-972. 

Davidson, T. L., Hargrave, S. L., Swithers, S. E., Sample, C. H., Fu, 
X., Kinzig, K. P., & Zheng, W. (2013). Inter-relationships among 
diet, obesity, and hippocampal-dependent cognitive function. 
Neuroscience, 253, 110-122. 

de Ribaupierre, A. (2002). Working memory and attentional 
processes across the lifespan. In P. Graf & N. Ohta (Eds.), Lifespan 
of development of human memory (pp. 59-80). Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press. 208 

Discover Esports. (2017). What are esports? Retrieved from 
https://discoveresports.com/what-are-esports/ 

Doolen, J., Alpert, P. T. and Miller, S. K. (2009), Parental disconnect 
between perceived and actual weight status of children: A 
metasynthesis of the current research. Journal of the American 
Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 21, 160–166. doi:10.1111/
j.1745-7599.2008.00382.x 

Drexler, P. (2005). Raising boys without men. Emmaus, PA: Rodale. 

Dutton, E., van der Linden, D., Lynn, R. (2016). The negative Flynn 
effect: A systematic literature review. Intelligence, 59, 163- 169. 
Ennis, R. H. (1987). A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and 
abilities. In J. Baron & R. Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching thinking skills: 
Theory and practice (pp. 9-26). New York: Freeman. 

Ericsson, K. (1998). The scientific study of expert levels of 
performance: General implications for optimal learning and 
creativity. High Ability Studies, 9(1), 75–100. 

Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed. NY: Norton & Company. 

Flynn, J. R. (1999). Searching for justice: The discovery of IQ gains 
over time. American Psychologist, 54(1), 5–20. 

Francis, N. (2006). The development of secondary discourse ability 
and metalinguistic awareness in second language learners. 
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 16, 37-47. 

Fraser-Thomas, J. L., Côté, J., & Deakin, J. (2005). Youth sport 


programs: An avenue to foster positive youth development. 
Physical Education & Sport Pedagogy, 10, 19-40. 

Furnham, A., & Bachtiar, V. (2008). Personality and intelligence as 
predictors of creativity. Personality and Individual Differences, 
45(7), 613–617. 

Furstenberg, F. F., & Cherlin, A. J. (1991). Divided families: What 
happens to children when parents part. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple 
intelligences. New York: Basic Books. 

Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for 
the 21st century. New York, NY: Basic Books. 

Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and 
women’s development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Gizer, I. R., Ficks, C., & Waldman, I. D. (2009). Candidate gene studies 
of ADHD: A meta-analytic review. Human Genetics, 126, 51–90. 

Gottfredson, L. S. (1997). Mainstream science on intelligence: An 
editorial with 52 signatories, history and bibliography. 
Intelligence, 24(1), 13–23. 

Gottfredson, L. S. (2003). Dissecting practical intelligence theory: Its 
claims and evidence. Intelligence, 31(4), 343–397. 

Greenspan, S., Loughlin, G., & Black, R. S. (2001). Credulity and 
gullibility in people with developmental disorders: A framework 
for future research. In L. M. Glidden (Ed.), Internationalreview 
ofresearch in mental retardation (Vol. 24, pp. 101–135). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 

Guttmann, J. (1993). Divorce in psychosocial perspective: Theory 
and research. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates. 

Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social 
intuitionist approach to moral judgment. Psychological Review, 
108(4), 814–834. 

Hales, C.M., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Ogden, C.L. (2017). 
Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: United States, 
2015–2016. NCHS data brief, no 288. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics. 209 


Halpern, D. F. (1992). Sex differences in cognitive abilities (2nd ed.). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Hansen, L., Umeda, Y., & McKinney, M. (2002). Savings in the 
relearning of second language vocabulary: The effects of time and 
proficiency. Language Learning, 52, 653-663. 

Hartup, W. W. (1983). Adolescents and their friends. New Directions 
for Child and Adolescent Development, 60, 3-22. 

Hennessey, B. A., & Amabile, T. M. (2010). Creativity. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 61, 569–598. 

Hetherington, E. M., & Kelly, J. (2002). For better or for worse: 
Divorce reconsidered. New York: W.W. Norton. 

Horvat, E. M. (2004). Moments of social inclusion and exclusion: 
Race, class, and cultural capital in family-school relationships. In 
A. Lareau (Author) & J. H. Ballantine & J. Z. Spade (Eds.), Schools 
and society: A sociological approach to education (2nd ed., pp. 
276-286). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Hoza, B., Mrug, S., Gerdes, A. C., Hinshaw, S. P., Bukowski, W. M., 
Gold, J. A., . . . Arnold, L. E. (2005). What aspects of peer 
relationships are impaired in children with ADHD? Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 411–423. 

Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from 
childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic Books. 

Jaffee, S., & Hyde, J. S. (2000). Gender differences in moral 
orientation: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 126(5), 703– 
726. 

Jimenez, R., Garcia, G., & Pearson. D. (1995). Three children, two 
languages, and strategic reading: Case studies in bilingual/
monolingual reading. American Educational Research Journal, 32 
(1), 67-97. Johnson, D., & Johnson, R. (1998). Learning together and 
alone: Cooperative, competitive, and individualistic learning, (5th 
ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Johnson, M. (2005). Developmental neuroscience, 
psychophysiology, and genetics. In M. Bornstein & M. Lamb (Eds.), 
Developmental science: An advanced textbook (5th ed., pp. 
187-222). 


Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Johnson, W., Carothers, A., & Deary, I. J. 
(2009). A role for the X chromosome in sex differences in 
variability in general intelligence? Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 4(6), 598–611. 

Kail, R. V., McBride-Chang, C., Ferrer, E., Cho, J.R., & Shu, H. (2013). 
Cultural differences in the development of processing speed. 
Developmental Science, 16, 476-483. 

Katz, D. L. (2015). Oblivobesity: Looking over the overweight that 
parents keep overlooking. Childhood Obesity, 11(3), 225- 226. 

Klein, R. G., Mannuzza, S., Olazagasti, M. A. R., Roizen, E., Hutchison, 
J. A., Lashua, E. C., & Castellanos, F. X. (2012). Clinical and 
functional outcome of childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder 33 years later. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 
1295–1303. 

Klima, T., & Repetti, R. L. (2008). Children’s peer relations and their 
psychological adjustment: Differences between close friends and 
the larger peer group. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 54, 151-178. 

Kohlberg, L. (1963). The development of children’s orientations 
toward a moral order: Sequence in the development of moral 
thought. Vita Humana, 16, 11-36. 

Kohlberg, L. (1984). The psychology of moral development: Essays on 
moral development (Vol. 2, p. 200). San Francisco, CA: Harper & 
Row. 

Kohnert, K., Yim, D., Nett, K., Kan, P., & Duran, L. (2005). Intervention 
with linguistically diverse preschool children. Language, Speech, 
and Hearing Services in Schools, 36, 251-263. 

Lally, M. J., & Valentine-French, S. J. (2018). Introduction to 
Psychology [Adapted from Charles Stangor, Introduction to 
Psychology] Grayslake, IL: College of Lake County. 210 

Liang, J., Matheson, B., Kaye, W., & Boutelle, K. (2014). 
Neurocognitive correlates of obesity and obesity-related 
behaviors in children and adolescents. International Journal of 
Obesity, 38(4), 494-506 

Linnet, K. M., Dalsgaard, S., Obel, C., Wisborg, K., Henriksen, T. B., 
Rodriquez, A., . . . Jarvelin, M. R.(2003). Maternal lifestyle factors 


in pregnancy risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and 
associated behaviors: A review of current evidence. The American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1028–1040. 

Livingston, G. (2018). About one-third of U.S. children are living 
with an unmarried parent. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/27/about-
one-third-of-u-s-children-are-living-with-an-
unmarriedparent/ 

Loe, I. M., & Feldman, H. M. (2007). Academic and educational 
outcomes of children with ADHD. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 
32, 643–654. 

Lofquist, D. (2011). Same-sex households. Current population 
reports, ACSBR/10-03. U.S. CensusBureau, Washington, DC. 
Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/
acsbr10-03.pdf 

Lu, S. (2016). Obesity and the growing brain. Monitor on Psychology, 
47(6), 40-43. 

Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2006). Study of mathematically 
precocious youth after 35 years: Uncovering antecedents for the 
development of math-science expertise. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 1(4), 316–345. 

Macbeth, D. (2003). Hugh Mehan’s Learning Lessons reconsidered: 
On the differences between naturalistic and critical analysis of 
classroom discourse. American Educational Research Journal, 40 
(1), 239-280. 

Markant, J. C., & Thomas, K. M. (2013). Postnatal brain development. 
In P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), Oxford handbook of developmental 
psychology. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Marshal, M. P., & Molina, B. S. G. (2006). Antisocial behaviors 
moderate the deviant peer pathway to substance use in children 
with ADHD. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 
35, 216–226. 

McCann, D., Barrett, A., Cooper, A., Crumpler, D., Dalen, L., 
Grimshaw, K., . . . Stevenson, J. (2007). Food additives and 
hyperactive behaviour in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children 


in the community: A randomised, double-blinded, placebo-
controlled trial. The Lancet, 370(9598), 1560–1567. 

McGuine, T. A. (2016). The association of sports specialization and 
history of lower extremity injury in high school athletes. Medical 
Science in Sports and Exercise, 45 (supplement 5), 866. 

McLanahan, S., & Sandefur, G. D. (1994). Growing up with a single 
parent: What hurts, what helps. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Medline Plus. (2016a). Phonological disorder. National Institute of 
Mental Health: U.S. National Library of Medicine. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001541.htm 

Medline Plus. (2016b). Speech and communication disorders. 
National Institute of Mental Health: U.S. National Library of 
Medicine. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/
speechandcommunicationdisorders.html 

Medline Plus. (2016c). Stuttering. National Institute of Mental 
Health: U.S. National Library of Medicine. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001427.htm 

Miller, P. H. (2000). How best to utilize a deficiency? Child 
Development, 71, 1013-1017. 

Minami, M. (2002). Culture-specific language styles: The 
development of oral narrative and literacy. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 

National Center for Learning Disabilities. (2017). The state of LD: 
Understanding the 1 in 5. Retrieved from https://www.ncld.org/
archives/blog/the-state-of-ld-understanding-the-1-in-5 

National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. (2016). 
Dyslexia information page. Retrieved from 
https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/All-Disorders/Dyslexia-
Information-Page 211 

National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders. 
(2016). Stuttering. Retrieved from https://www.nidcd.nih.gov/
health/stuttering 

Neisser, U. (1997). Rising scores on intelligence tests. American 
Scientist, 85, 440-447. 


Neisser, U. (1998). The rising curve. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Oude Luttikhuis, H., Stolk, R. and Sauer, P. (2010), How do parents 
of 4- to 5-year-old children perceive the weight of their children? 
Acta Pædiatrica, 99, 263–267. doi:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2009.01576.x 

Patterson, C. J. (2013). Children of lesbian and gay parents: 
Psychology, law, and Policy. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and 
Gender Diversity, 1, 27-34. 

Pettit, G. S., Clawson, M. A., Dodge, K. A., & Bates, J. E. (1996). 
Stability and change in peer-rejected status: The role of child 
behavior, parenting, and family ecology. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 
42(2), 267-294. 

Pew Research Center. (2010). New family types. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/11/18/vi-new-
familytypes/ 

Pew Research Center. (2015). Parenting in America. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/wpcontent/uploads/sites/3/
2015/12/2015-12-17_parenting-in-america_FINAL.pdf 

Plante, I., De la Sablonnière, R., Aronson, J. M., & Théorêt, M. (2013). 
Gender stereotype endorsement and achievement-related 
outcomes: The role of competence beliefs and task values. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 38(3), 225-235. 

PreBler, A., Krajewski, K., & Hasselhorn, M. (2013). Working memory 
capacity in preschool children contributes to the acquisition of 
school relevant precursor skills. Learning and Individual 
Differences, 23, 138-144. 

Public Law 93-112, 87 Stat. 394 (Sept. 26, 1973). Rehabilitation Act of 
1973. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office. 

Public Law 101-336, 104 Stat. 327 (July 26, 1990). Americans with 
Disabilities Act of 1990. Washington, D.C.: United States 
Government Printing Office. 

Public Law 108-446, 118 Stat. 2647 (December 3, 2004). Individuals 
with Disabilities Education Improvement Act. Washington, D.C.: 
United States Government Printing Office. 


Reid, S. (2017). 4 questions for Mitch Prinstein. Monitor on 
Psychology, 48(8), 31-32. 

Rest, J. (1979). Development in judging moral issues. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 

Retelsdorf, J., Asbrock, F., & Schwartz, K. (2015). “Michael can’t read!” 
teachers’ gender stereotypes and boys’ reading selfconcept. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 186-194. 

Richter, D, & Lemola, S. (2017). Growing up with a single mother and 
life satisfaction in adulthood: A test of mediating and moderating 
factors. PLOS ONE 12(6): e0179639. Retrieved from 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0179639 

Rogers, R., Malancharuvil-Berkes, E., Mosely, M., Hui, D., & O’Garro, 
G. (2005). Critical discourse analysis in education: A review of the 
literature. Review of Educational Research, 75 (3), 365-416. 

Rogoff, B. (2003). The culture of human development. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Rolls, E. (2000). Memory systems in the brain. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 51, 599-630. 

Ross, H. S., & Lollis, S. P. (1989). A social relations analysis of toddler 
peer relations. Child Development, 60, 1082-1091. 

Rubin, R. (1980). Children’s friendships. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Sabo, D., & Veliz, P. (2008). Go out and play: Youth sports in America. 
East Meadow, NY: Women’s Sports Foundation 212 

Sarafrazi, N., Hughes, J. P., & Borrud, L. (2014). Perception of weight 
status in U.S. children and adolescents aged 8-15 years, 
2005-2012. NCHS Data Brief, 158, 1-8. 

Schneider, W., Kron-Sperl, V., & Hünnerkopf, M. (2009). The 
development of young children’s memory strategies: Evidence 
from the Würzburg Longitudinal Memory Study. European 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6, 70-99. 

Schneider, W., & Pressley, M. (1997). Memory development between 
2 and 20. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Schwartz, D., Lansford, J. E., Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., & Bates, J. 


E. (2014). Peer victimization during middle childhood as a lead 
indicator of internalizing problems and diagnostic outcomes in 
late adolescence. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent 
Psychology, 44, 393-404. 

Seagoe, M. V. (1975). Terman and the gifted. Los Altos, CA: William 
Kaufmann. 

Seccombe, K., & Warner, R. L. (2004). Marriages and families: 
Relationships in social context. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/
Thomson Learning. 

Seifert, K. (2011). Educational psychology. Houston, TX: Rice 
University. 

Selman, Robert L. (1980). The growth of interpersonal 
understanding. London: Academic Press. 

Siegler, R. S. (1992). The other Alfred Binet. Developmental 
Psychology, 28(2), 179–190. 

Simonton, D. K. (1992). The social context of career success and 
course for 2,026 scientists and inventors. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 18(4), 452–463. 

Simonton, D. K. (2000). Creativity: Cognitive, personal, 
developmental, and social aspects. American Psychologist, 55(1), 
151– 158. 

Sodian, B., & Schneider, W. (1999). Memory strategy development: 
Gradual increase, sudden insight or roller coaster? In F. E. 
Weinert & W. Schneider (Eds.), Individual development from 3 
to 12: Findings from the Munich Longitudinal Study (pp. 61-77). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Sourander, A., Sucksdorff, M., Chudal, R, Surcel, H., Hinkka-Yli-
Salomäki, S., Gyllenberg, D., Cheslack-Postava, K., & Brown, A. 
(2019). Prenatal cotinine levels and ADHD among offspring. 
Pediatrics, 143(3), e20183144. 

Sport Policy and Research Collaborative (SPARC, 2013). What is the 
status of youth coach training in the U.S.? University of Florida. 
Retrieved from https://assets.aspeninstitute.org/content/
uploads/files/content/upload/


Project%20Play%20Research%20Brief%20Coach 
ing%20Education%20–%20FINAL.pdf 

Sport Policy and Research Collaborative (SPARC, 2016). State of play 
2016: Trends and developments. The Aspen Institute. Retrieved 
from https://www.aspeninstitute.org/publications/state-
play-2016-trends-developments/ 

Spreen, O., Rissser, A., & Edgell, D. (1995). Developmental 
neuropsychology. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of human 
intelligence. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Sternberg, R. J. (2003). Contemporary theories of intelligence. In 
W. M. Reynolds & G. E. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: 
Educational psychology (Vol. 7, pp. 23–45). Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons. 

Sternberg, R. J., Wagner, R. K., & Okagaki, L. (1993). Practical 
intelligence: The nature and role of tacit knowledge in work and 
at school. In J. M. Puckett & H. W. Reese (Eds.), Mechanisms of 
everyday cognition (pp. 205–227). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 

Stewart, A. J., Copeland, Chester, Malley, & Barenbaum. (1997). 
Separating together: How divorce transforms families. New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Stewart, S. M. & Bond, M. H. (2002), A critical look at parenting 
research from the mainstream: Problems uncovered while 
adapting Western research to non-Western cultures. British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, 379–392. doi:10.1348/
026151002320620389 213 

Stopbullying.gov. (2018). Preventing weight-based bullying. 
Retrieved from https://www.stopbullying.gov/blog/2018/11/05/
preventing-weight-based-bullying.html 

Swanson, J. M., Kinsbourne, M., Nigg, J., Lamphear, B., Stefanatos, 
G. A., Volkow, N., …& Wadhwa, P. D. (2007). Etiologic subtypes 
of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: brain imaging, 
molecular genetic and environmental factors and the dopamine 
hypothesis. Neuropsychological Review, 17(1), 39-59. 


Tarasova, I. V., Volf, N. V., & Razoumnikova, O. M. (2010). Parameters 
of cortical interactions in subjects with high and low levels of 
verbal creativity. Human Physiology, 36(1), 80–85. 

Terman, L. M., & Oden, M. H. (1959). Genetic studies of genius: The 
gifted group at mid-life (Vol. 5). Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. 

Thakur, G. A., Sengupta, S. M., Grizenko, N., Schmitz, N., Page, V., & 
Joober, R. (2013). Maternal smoking during pregnancy and ADHD: 
A comprehensive clinical and neurocognitive characterization. 
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 15, 149– 157. 

Tharp, R. & Gallimore, R. (1989). Rousing minds to life. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Thompson, A., Molina, B. S. G., Pelham, W., & Gnagy, E. M. (2007). 
Risky driving in adolescents and young adults with childhood 
ADHD. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32, 745–759. 

Torres-Guzman, M. (1998). Language culture, and literacy in Puerto 
Rican communities. In B. Perez (Ed.), Sociocultural contexts of 
language and literacy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Treffert, D. A., & Wallace, G. L. (2004). Islands of genius. Scientific 
American, 14–23. Retrieved from http://gordonresearch.com/
articles_autism/SciAm-Islands_of_Genius.pdf 

Tse, L. (2001). Why don’t they learn English? New York: Teachers’ 
College Press. 

Turiel, E. (1998). The development of morality. In W. Damon (Ed.), 
Handbook of child psychology: Socialization (5th ed., Vol. 3, pp. 
863–932). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. 

United States Department of Education. (2017). Every Student 
Succeeds Act (ESSA). Retrieved from https://www.ed.gov/
essa?src=ft United States Youth Soccer. (2012). 

US youth soccer at a glance. Retrieved from 
http://www.usyouthsoccer.org/media_kit/ataglance/ 

Vakil, E., Blachstein, H., Sheinman, M., & Greenstein, Y. (2009). 
Developmental changes in attention tests norms: Implications for 
the structure of attention. Child Neuropsychology, 15, 21-39. 

van der Molen, M., & Molenaar, P. (1994). Cognitive 


psychophysiology: A window to cognitive development and brain 
maturation. In G. Dawson & K. Fischer (Eds.), Human behavior and 
the developing brain. New York: Guilford. 

Visher, E. B., & Visher, J. S. (1985). Stepfamilies are different. Journal 
of Family Therapy, 7(1), 9-18. 

Volkow N. D., Fowler J. S., Logan J., Alexoff D., Zhu W., Telang F., . 
. . Apelskog-Torres K. (2009). Effects of modafinil on dopamine 
and dopamine transporters in the male human brain: Clinical 
implications. Journal of the American Medical Association, 301, 
1148–1154. 

Wagner, R., & Sternberg, R. (1985). Practical intelligence in real-
world pursuits: The role of tacit knowledge. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 49(2), 436–458. 

Watkins, C. E., Campbell, V. L., Nieberding, R., & Hallmark, R. (1995). 
Contemporary practice of psychological assessment by clinical 
psychologists. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 
26(1), 54–60. 

Weaver, J. M., & Schofield, T. J. (2015). Mediation and moderation of 
divorce effects on children’s behavior problems. Journal of Family 
Psychology, 29(1), 39-48. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
fam0000043 214 

Weir, K. (2019). Family-based behavioral treatment is key to 
addressing childhood obesity. Monitor on Pscyhology, 50(4), 31- 
35. 

Weisberg, R. (2006). Creativity: Understanding innovation in 
problem solving, science, invention, and the arts. Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons. 

Wilens, E., Fararone, S.V., Biederman, J., & Gunawardene, S. (2003). 
Does the treatment of Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
with stimulants contribute to use/abuse? Pediatrics, 111(1), 97-109. 

Wolraich, M. L., Wilson, D. B., & White, J. W. (1995). The effect 
of sugar on behavior or cognition in children. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 274, 1617–1621. 


Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 5 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 18: Psychosocial 
Development in Middle 
Childhood 

Chapter 18 Learning Objectives 

Describe Erikson’s fourth stage of industry vs. 
inferiority 
Describe the changes in self-concept, self-esteem, 
and self-efficacy 
Explain Kohlberg’s stages of moral development 
Describe the importance of peers, the stages of 
friendships, peer acceptance, and the consequences 
of peer acceptance 
Describe bullying, cyberbullying and the 
consequences of bullying 
Identify the types of families where children reside 
Identify the five family tasks 
Explain the consequences of divorce on children 
Describe the effects of cohabitation and remarriage 
on children 
Describe the characteristics and developmental 
stages of blended families 



Erikson: Industry vs. Inferiority 

According to Erikson, children in middle and late childhood are 
very busy or industrious (Erikson, 1982). They are constantly doing, 
planning, playing, getting together with friends, and achieving. This 
is a very active time, and a time when they are gaining a sense of 
how they measure up when compared with peers. Erikson believed 
that if these industrious children can be successful in their 
endeavors, they will get a sense of confidence for future challenges. 
If not, a sense of inferiority can be particularly haunting during 
middle and late childhood. 

Self-Understanding 

Self-concept refers to beliefs about general personal identity 
(Seiffert, 2011). These beliefs include personal attributes, such as 
one’s age, physical characteristics, behaviors, and competencies. 
Children in middle and late childhood have a more realistic sense 
of self than do those in early childhood, and they better understand 
their strengths and weaknesses. This can be attributed to greater 
experience in comparing their own performance with that of others, 
and to greater cognitive flexibility. Children in middle and late 
childhood are also able to include other peoples’ appraisals of them 
into their self-concept, including parents, teachers, peers, culture, 
and media. Internalizing others’ appraisals and creating social 
comparison affect children’s self-esteem, which is defined as an 
evaluation of one’s identity. Children can have individual 
assessments of how well they perform a variety of activities and also 
develop an overall global self-assessment. If there is a discrepancy 
between how children view themselves and what they consider to 
be their ideal selves, their self-esteem can be negatively affected. 


Another important development in self-understanding is self-
efficacy, which is the belief that you are capable of carrying out a 
specific task or of reaching a specific goal (Bandura, 1977, 1986, 1997). 
Large discrepancies between self-efficacy and ability can create 
motivational problems for the individual (Seifert, 2011). If a student 
believes that he or she can solve mathematical problems, then the 
student is more likely to attempt the mathematics homework that 
the teacher assigns. 

Unfortunately, the converse is also true. If a student believes 
that he or she is incapable of math, then the student is less likely 
to attempt the math homework regardless of the student’s actual 
ability in math. Since self-efficacy is self-constructed, it is possible 
for students to miscalculate or misperceive their true skill, and 
these misperceptions can have complex effects on students’ 
motivations. It is possible to have either too much or too little self-
efficacy, and according to Bandura (1997) the optimum level seems 
to be either at or slightly above, true ability. 


Kohlberg’s Stages of Moral Development 

Kohlberg (1963) built on the work of Piaget and was interested in 
finding out how our moral reasoning changes as we get older. He 
wanted to find out how people decide what is right and what is 
wrong. Just as Piaget believed that children’s cognitive development 
follows specific patterns, Kohlberg (1984) argued that we learn our 
moral values through active thinking and reasoning, and that moral 
development follows a series of stages. Kohlberg’s six stages are 
generally organized into three levels of moral reasons. To study 
moral development, Kohlberg posed moral dilemmas to children, 
teenagers, and adults, such as the following: 

A man’s wife is dying of cancer and there is only one drug that can 
save her. The only place to get the drug is at the store of a pharmacist 
who is known to overcharge people for drugs. The man can only pay 
$1,000, but the pharmacist wants $2,000, and refuses to sell it to him 
for less, or to let him pay later. Desperate, the man later breaks into 
the pharmacy and steals the medicine. Should he have done that? Was 
it right or wrong? Why? (Kohlberg, 1984) 

Level One-Preconventional Morality: In stage one, moral 
reasoning is based on concepts of punishment. The child believes 
that if the consequence for an action is punishment, then the action 
was wrong. In the second stage, the child bases his or her thinking 
on self-interest and reward. “You scratch my back, I’ll scratch yours.” 
The youngest subjects seemed to answer based on what would 
happen to the man as a result of the act. For example, they might 
say the man should not break into the pharmacy because the 
pharmacist might find him and beat him. Or they might say that the 
man should break in and steal the drug and his wife will give him a 
big kiss. Right or wrong, both decisions were based on what would 
physically happen to the man as a result of the act. This is a self-
centered approach to moral decision-making. He called this most 
superficial understanding of right and wrong pre-conventional 
morality. Preconventional morality focuses on self-interest. 


Punishment is avoided, and rewards are sought. Adults can also fall 
into these stages, particularly when they are under pressure. 

Level Two-Conventional Morality: Those tested who based their 
answers on what other people would think of the man as a result 
of his act, were placed in Level Two. For instance, they might say 
he should break into the store, and then everyone would think he 
was a good husband, or he should not because it is against the law. 
In either case, right and wrong is determined by what other people 
think. In stage three, the person wants to please others. At stage 
four, the person acknowledges the importance of social norms or 
laws and wants to be a good member of the group or society. A 
good decision is one that gains the approval of others or one that 
complies with the law. This he called conventional morality, people 
care about the effect of their actions on others. Some older children, 
adolescents, and adults use this reasoning. 

Level Three-Postconventional Morality: Right and wrong are 
based on social contracts established for the good of everyone and 
that can transcend the self and social convention. For example, 
the man should break into the store because, even if it is against 
the law, the wife needs the drug and her life is more important 
than the consequences the man might face for breaking the law. 
Alternatively, the man should not violate the principle of the right 
of property because this rule is essential for social order. In either 
case, the person’s judgment goes beyond what happens to the self. 
It is based on a concern for others; for society as a whole, or for 
an ethical standard rather than a legal standard. This level is called 
post-conventional moral development because it goes beyond 
convention or what other people think to a higher, universal ethical 
principle of conduct that may or may not be reflected in the law. 
Notice that such thinking is the kind Supreme Court justices do 
all day when deliberating whether a law is moral or ethical, which 
requires being able to think abstractly. Often this is not 
accomplished until a person reaches adolescence or adulthood. In 
the fifth stage, laws are recognized as social contracts. The reasons 
for the laws, like justice, equality, and dignity, are used to evaluate 


decisions and interpret laws. In the sixth stage, individually 
determined universal ethical principles are weighed to make moral 
decisions. Kohlberg said that few people ever reach this stage. The 
six stages can be reviewed in Table 5.6. 

Although research has supported Kohlberg’s idea that moral 
reasoning changes from an early emphasis on punishment and 
social rules and regulations to an emphasis on more general ethical 
principles, as with Piaget’s approach, Kohlberg’s stage model is 
probably too simple. For one, people may use higher levels of 
reasoning for some types of problems but revert to lower levels in 
situations where doing so is more consistent with their goals or 
beliefs (Rest, 1979). Second, it has been argued that the stage model 
is particularly appropriate for Western, rather than nonWestern, 
samples in which allegiance to social norms, such as respect for 
authority, may be particularly important (Haidt, 2001). In addition, 
there is frequently little correlation between how we score on the 
moral stages and how we behave in real life. 

Table 5.6 


Perhaps the most important critique of Kohlberg’s theory is that 
it may describe the moral development of males better than it 
describes that of females. Gilligan (1982) has argued that, because 
of differences in their socialization, males tend to value principles 
of justice and rights, whereas females value caring for and helping 
others. Although there is little evidence for a gender difference in 
Kohlberg’s stages of moral development (Turiel, 1998), it is true that 
girls and women tend to focus more on issues of caring, helping, and 
connecting with others than do boys and men (Jaffee & Hyde, 2000). 

Friends and Peers 

As toddlers, children may begin to show a preference for certain 
playmates (Ross & Lollis, 1989). However, peer interactions at this 
age often involve more parallel play rather than intentional social 
interactions (Pettit, Clawson, Dodge, & Bates, 1996). By age four, 
many children use the word “friend” when referring to certain 
children and do so with a fair degree of stability (Hartup, 1983). 
However, among young children “friendship” is often based on 
proximity, such as they live next door, attend the same school, or it 
refers to whomever they just happen to be playing with at the time 
(Rubin, 1980). 

Friendships take on new importance as judges of one’s worth, 
competence, and attractiveness in middle and late childhood. 
Friendships provide the opportunity for learning social skills, such 
as how to communicate with others and how to negotiate 
differences. Children get ideas from one another about how to 
perform certain tasks, how to gain popularity, what to wear or say, 
and how to act. This society of children marks a transition from a life 
focused on the family to a life concerned with peers. During middle 
and late childhood, peers increasingly play an important role. For 
example, peers play a key role in a child’s self-esteem at this age 
as any parent who has tried to console a rejected child will tell 


you. No matter how complimentary and encouraging the parent 
may be, being rejected by friends can only be remedied by renewed 
acceptance. Children’s conceptualization of what makes someone 
a “friend” changes from a more egocentric understanding to one 
based on mutual trust and commitment. Both Bigelow (1977) and 
Selman (1980) believe that these changes are linked to advances in 
cognitive development. 

Bigelow and La Gaipa (1975) outline three stages to children’s 
conceptualization of friendship. In stage one, reward-cost, 
friendship focuses on mutual activities. Children in early, middle, 
and late childhood all emphasize similar interests as the main 
characteristics of a good friend. Stage two, normative expectation 
focuses on conventional morality; that is, the emphasis is on a friend 
as someone who is kind and shares with you. Clark and Bittle (1992) 
found that fifth graders emphasized this in a friend more than third 
or eighth graders. In the final stage, empathy and understanding, 
friends are people who are loyal, committed to the relationship, and 
share intimate information. Clark and Bittle (1992) reported eighth 
graders emphasized this more in a friend. They also found that 
as early as fifth grade, girls were starting to include a sharing of 


secrets, and not betraying confidences as crucial to someone who is 
a friend. 

Selman (1980) outlines five stages of friendship from early 
childhood through to adulthood: 

Momentary physical interaction, a friend is someone who you 
are playing with at this point in time. Selman notes that this is 
typical of children between the ages of three and six. These 
early friendships are based more on circumstances (e.g., a 
neighbor) than on genuine similarities. 
One-way assistance, a friend is someone who does nice things 
for you, such as saving you a seat on the school bus or sharing 
a toy. However, children in this stage, do not always think 
about what they are contributing to the relationships. 
Nonetheless, having a friend is important and children will 
sometimes put up with a not so nice friend, just to have a 
friend. Children as young as five and as old as nine may be in 
this stage. 
Fair-weather cooperation, children are very concerned with 
fairness and reciprocity, and thus, a friend is someone returns 
a favor. In this stage, if a child does something Figure 5.21 
Source Source 198 nice for a friend there is an expectation that 
the friend will do something nice for them at the first available 
opportunity. When this fails to happen, a child may break off 
the friendship. Selman found that some children as young as 
seven and as old as twelve are in this stage. 
Intimate and mutual sharing, typically between the ages of 
eight and fifteen, a friend is someone who you can tell them 
things you would tell no one else. Children and teens in this 
stage no longer “keep score” and do things for a friend because 
they genuinely care for the person. If a friendship dissolves in 
the stage it is usually due to a violation of trust. However, 
children in this stage do expect their friend to share similar 
interests and viewpoints and may take it as a betrayal if a 
friend likes someone that they do not. 



Autonomous interdependence, a friend is someone who 
accepts you and that you accept as they are. In this stage 
children, teens, and adults accept and even appreciate 
differences between themselves and their friends. They are 
also not as possessive, so they are less likely to feel threatened 
if their friends have other relationships or interests. Children 
are typically twelve or older in this stage. 


Peer Relationships: Sociometric assessment measures attraction 
between members of a group, such as a classroom of students. 
In sociometric research children are asked to mention the three 
children they like to play with the most, and those they do not 
like to play with. The number of times a child is nominated for 
each of the two categories (like, do not like) is tabulated. Popular 
children receive many votes in the “like” category, and very few 
in the “do not like” category. In contrast, rejected children receive 
more unfavorable votes, and few favorable ones. Controversial 
children are mentioned frequently in each category, with several 
children liking them and several children placing them in the do 
not like category. Neglected children are rarely mentioned in either 
category, and the average child has a few positive votes with very 
few negative ones (Asher & Hymel, 1981). 

Most children want to be liked and accepted by their friends. 
Some popular children are nice and have good social skills. These 
popular-prosocial children tend to do well in school and are 
cooperative and friendly. Popular-antisocial children may gain 
popularity by acting tough or spreading rumors about others 
(Cillessen & Mayeux, 2004). Rejected children are sometimes 
excluded because they are rejected-withdrawn. These children are 
shy and withdrawn and are easy targets for bullies because they are 
unlikely to retaliate when belittled (Boulton, 1999). Other rejected 
children are rejected-aggressive and are ostracized because they 
are aggressive, loud, and confrontational. The aggressive-rejected 
children may be acting out of a feeling of insecurity. Unfortunately, 
their fear of rejection only leads to behavior that brings further 


rejection from other children. Children who are not accepted are 
more likely to experience conflict, lack confidence, and have trouble 
adjusting (Klima & Repetti, 2008; Schwartz, Lansford, Dodge, Pettit, 
& Bates, 2014). 

Long-Term Consequences of Popularity: Childhood popularity 
researcher Mitch Prinstein has found that likability in childhood 
leads to positive outcomes throughout one’s life (as cited in Reid, 
2017). Adults who were accepted in childhood have stronger 
marriages and work relationships, earn more money, and have 
better health outcomes than those who were unpopular. Further, 
those who were unpopular as children, experienced greater anxiety, 
depression, substance use, obesity, physical health problems and 
suicide. Prinstein found that a significant consequence of 
unpopularity was that children were denied opportunities to build 
their social skills and negotiate complex interactions, thus 
contributing to their continued unpopularity. Further, biological 
effects can occur due to unpopularity, as social rejection can 
activate genes that lead to an inflammatory response. 


Bullying 

According to Stopbullying.gov (2016), a federal government website 
managed by the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 
bullying is defined as unwanted, aggressive behavior among school 
aged children that involves a real or perceived power imbalance. 
Further, the aggressive behavior happens more than once or has 
the potential to be repeated. There are different types of bullying, 
including verbal bullying, which is saying or writing mean things, 
teasing, name calling, taunting, threatening, or making 
inappropriate sexual comments. Social bullying, also referred to 
as relational bullying, involves spreading rumors, purposefully 
excluding someone from a group, or embarrassing someone on 
purpose. Physical Bullying involves hurting a person’s body or 
possessions. 

A more recent form of bullying is cyberbullying, which involves 
electronic technology. Examples of cyberbullying include sending 
mean text messages or emails, creating fake profiles, and posting 
embarrassing pictures, videos or rumors on social networking sites. 
Children who experience cyberbullying have a harder time getting 
away from the behavior because it can occur any time of day and 
without being in the presence of others. Additional concerns of 
cyberbullying include that messages and images can be posted 
anonymously, distributed quickly, and be difficult to trace or delete. 
Children who are cyberbullied are more likely to: experience in-
person bullying, be unwilling to attend school, receive poor grades, 
use alcohol and drugs, skip school, have lower self-esteem, and have 
more health problems (Stopbullying.gov, 2016). The National Center 
for Education Statistics and Bureau of Justice statistics indicate that 
in 2010-2011, 28% of students in grades 6-12 experienced bullying 
and 7% experienced cyberbullying. The 2013 Youth Risk Behavior 
Surveillance System, which monitors six types of health risk 
behaviors, indicate that 20% of students in grades 9-12 experienced 
bullying and 15% experienced cyberbullying (Stopbullying.gov, 2016). 


Those at risk for bullying: Bullying can happen to anyone, but 
some students are at an increased risk for being bullied including 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgendered (LGBT) youth, those with 
disabilities, and those who are socially isolated. Additionally, those 
who are perceived as different, weak, less popular, overweight, or 
having low self-esteem, have a higher likelihood of being bullied. 
200 Those who are more likely to bully: Bullies are often thought 
of as having low self-esteem, and then bully others to feel better 
about themselves. Although this can occur, many bullies in fact have 
high levels of self-esteem. They possess considerable popularity and 
social power and have well-connected peer relationships. They do 
not lack self-esteem, and instead lack empathy for others. They like 
to dominate or be in charge of others. 

Those who are more likely to bully: Bullies are often thought 
of as having low self-esteem, and then bully others to feel better 
about themselves. Although this can occur, many bullies in fact have 
high levels of self-esteem. They possess considerable popularity and 
social power and have well-connected peer relationships. They do 
not lack self-esteem, and instead lack empathy for others. They like 
to dominate or be in charge of others. 


Bullied children often do not ask for help: Unfortunately, most 
children do not let adults know that they are being bullied. Some 
fear retaliation from the bully, while others are too embarrassed to 
ask for help. Those who are socially isolated may not know who to 
ask for help or believe that no one would care or assist them if they 
did ask for assistance. Consequently, it is important for parents and 
teacher to know the warning signs that may indicate a child is being 
bullied. These include: unexplainable injuries, lost or destroyed 
possessions, changes in eating or sleeping patterns, declining 
school grades, not wanting to go to school, loss of friends, 
decreased selfesteem and/or self-destructive behaviors. 

Family Life 

Family Tasks: One of the ways to assess the quality of family life 
is to consider the tasks of families. Berger (2014) lists five family 
functions: 

1. Providing food, clothing and shelter 
2. Encouraging learning 
3. Developing self-esteem 
4. Nurturing friendships with peers 
5. Providing harmony and stability 


Notice that in addition to providing food, shelter, and clothing, 
families are responsible for helping the child learn, relate to others, 
and have a confident sense of self. Hopefully, the family will provide 
a harmonious and stable environment for living. A good home 
environment is one in which the child’s physical, cognitive, 
emotional, and social needs are adequately met. Sometimes families 
emphasize physical needs but ignore cognitive or emotional needs. 
Other times, families pay close attention to physical needs and 
academic requirements but may fail to nurture the child’s 
friendships with peers or guide the child toward developing healthy 
relationships. Parents might want to consider how it feels to live 
in the household as a child. The tasks of families listed above are 
functions that can be fulfilled in a variety of family types-not just 
intact, two-parent households. 

Parenting Styles: As discussed in the previous chapter, parenting 
styles affect the relationship parents have with their children. 
During middle and late childhood, children spend less time with 
parents and more time with peers, and consequently parents may 
have to modify their approach to parenting to accommodate the 
child’s growing independence. The authoritative style, which 
incorporates reason and engaging in joint decision-making 
whenever possible may be the most effective approach (Berk, 2007). 
However, Asian-American, African-American, and Mexican-
American parents are more likely than European-Americans to use 
an authoritarian style of parenting. This authoritarian style of 
parenting that uses strict discipline and focuses on obedience is also 
tempered with acceptance and warmth on the part of the parents. 
Children raised in this manner tend to be confident, successful and 
happy (Chao, 2001; Stewart & Bond, 2002). 

Living Arrangements: Certainly, the living arrangements of 
children have changed significantly over the years. In 1960, 92% of 
children resided with married parents, while only 5% had parents 
who were divorced or separated and 1% resided with parents who 
had never been married. By 2008, 70% of children resided with 
married parents, 15% had parent who were divorced or separated, 
and 14% resided with parents who had never married (Pew Research 
Center, 2010). In 2017, only 65% of children lived with two married 
parents, while 32% (24 million children younger than 18) lived with 
an unmarried parent (Livingston, 2018). Some 3% of children were 
not living with any parents, according to the U.S. Census Bureau 
data. 

Most children in unmarried parent households in 2017 were living 
with a solo mother (21%), but a growing share were living with 
cohabiting parents (7%) or a sole father (4%) (see Figure 5.24). The 


increase in children living with solo or cohabiting parents was 
thought to be due to the overall declines in marriage, as well as 
increases in divorce. Of concern is that living with only one parent 
was associated with a household’s lower economic situation. 
Specifically, 30% of solo mothers, 17% of solo fathers, and 16% of 
families with a cohabitating couple lived in poverty. In contrast, 
only 8% of married couples lived below the poverty line (Livingston, 
2018). 

Figure 5.24 

Lesbian and Gay Parenting: Research has consistently shown that 
the children of lesbian and gay parents are as successful as those of 
heterosexual parents, and consequently efforts are being made to 
ensure that gay and lesbian couples are provided with the same legal 
rights as heterosexual couples when adopting children (American 
Civil Liberties Union, 2016). 


Patterson (2013) reviewed more than 25 years of social science 
research on the development of children raised by lesbian and gay 
parents and found no evidence of detrimental effects. In fact, 
research has demonstrated that children of lesbian and gay parents 
are as well-adjusted overall as those of heterosexual parents. 
Specifically, research comparing children based on parental sexual 
orientation has not shown any differences in the development of 
gender identity, gender role development, or sexual orientation. 
Additionally, there were no differences between the children of 
lesbian or gay parents and those of heterosexual parents in 
separation-individuation, behavior problems, self-concept, locus of 
control, moral judgment, school adjustment, intelligence, 
victimization, and substance use. Further, research has consistently 
found that children and adolescents of gay and lesbian parents 


report normal social relationships with family members, peers, and 
other adults. Patterson concluded that there is no evidence to 
support legal discrimination or policy bias against lesbian and gay 
parents. 

Divorce: Using families in the National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development (NICHD) Study of Early Child Care and 
Youth Development, Weaver and Schofield (2015) found that 
children from divorced families had significantly more behavior 
problems than those from a matched sample of children from non-
divorced families. These problems were evident immediately after 
the separation and also in early and middle adolescence. An analysis 
of divorce factors indicated that children exhibited more 
externalizing behaviors if the family had fewer financial resources 
before the separation. It was hypothesized that the lower income 
and lack of educational and community resources contributed to 
the stress involved in the divorce. Additional factors contributing to 
children’s behavior problems included a post-divorce home that was 
less supportive and stimulating, and a mother that was less sensitive 
and more depressed. 

Additional concerns include that the child will grieve the loss of 
the parent they no longer see as frequently. The child may also 
grieve about other family members that are no longer available. Very 
often, divorce means a change in the amount of money coming into 
the household. Custodial mothers experience a 25% to 50% drop in 
their family income, and even five years after the divorce they have 
reached only 94% of their pre-divorce family income (Anderson, 
2018). As a result, children experience new constraints on spending 
or entertainment. School-aged children, especially, may notice that 
they can no longer have toys, clothing or other items to which they 
have grown accustomed. Or it may mean that there is less eating 
out or being able to afford participation in extracurricular activities. 
The custodial parent may experience stress at not being able to 
rely on child support payments or having the same level of income 
as before. This can affect decisions regarding healthcare, vacations, 
rents, mortgages and other expenditures, and the stress can result 


in less happiness and relaxation in the home. The parent who has 
to take on more work may also be less available to the children. 
Children may also have to adjust to other changes accompanying 
a divorce. The divorce might mean moving to a new home and 
changing schools or friends. It might mean leaving a neighborhood 
that has meant a lot to them as well. 

Relationships of adult children of divorce are identified as more 
problematic than those adults from intact homes. For 25 years, 
Hetherington and Kelly (2002) followed children of divorce and 
those whose parents stayed together. The results indicated that 25% 
of adults whose parents had divorced experienced social, emotional, 
or psychological problems compared with only 10% of those whose 
parents remained married. For example, children of divorce have 
more difficulty forming and sustaining intimate relationships as 
young adults, are more dissatisfied with their marriage, and 
consequently more likely to get divorced themselves (Arkowitz & 
Lilienfeld, 2013). One of the most commonly cited long-term effects 
of divorce is that children of divorce may have lower levels of 
education or occupational status (Richter & Lemola, 2017). This may 
be a consequence of lower income and resources for funding 
education rather than to divorce per se. In those households where, 
economic hardship does not occur, there may be no impact on long-
term economic status (Drexler, 2005). 

According to Arkowitz and Lilienfeld (2013), long-term harm from 
parental divorce is not inevitable, however, and children can 
navigate the experience successfully. A variety of factors can 
positively contribute to the child’s adjustment. For example, 
children manage better when parents limit conflict, and provide 
warmth, emotional support and appropriate discipline. Further, 
children cope better when they reside with a well-functioning 
parent and have access to social support from peers and other 
adults. Those at a higher socioeconomic status may fare better 
because some of the negative consequences of divorce are a result 
of financial hardship rather than divorce per se (Anderson, 2014; 
Drexler, 2005). It is important when considering the research 


findings on the consequences of divorce for children to consider all 
the factors that can influence the outcome, as some of the negative 
consequences associated with divorce are due to preexisting 
problems (Anderson, 2014). Although they may experience more 
problems than children from non-divorced families, most children 
of divorce lead happy, well-adjusted lives and develop strong, 
positive relationships with their custodial parent (Seccombe & 
Warner, 2004). 

Children from single-parent families talk to their mothers more 
often than children of two-parent families (McLanahan & Sandefur, 
1994). In a study of college-age respondents, Arditti (1999) found 
that increasing closeness and a movement toward more democratic 
parenting styles was experienced. Others have also found that 
relationships between mothers and children become closer and 
stronger (Guttman, 1993) and suggest that greater equality and less 
rigid parenting is beneficial after divorce (Steward, Copeland, 
Chester, Malley, & Barenbaum, 1997). 

Certain characteristics of the child can also facilitate post-divorce 
adjustment. Specifically, children with an easygoing temperament, 
who problem-solve well, and seek social support manage better 
after divorce. A further protective factor for children is intelligence 
(Weaver & Schofield, 2015). Children with higher IQ scores appear to 
be buffered from the effects of divorce. Children may be given more 
opportunity to discover their own abilities and gain independence 
that fosters self-esteem. If divorce means a reduction in tension, 
the child may feel relief. Overall, not all children of divorce suffer 
negative consequences (Hetherington & Kelly, 2002). Furstenberg 
and Cherlin (1991) believe that the primary factor influencing the 
way that children adjust to divorce is the way the custodial parent 
adjusts to the divorce. If that parent is adjusting well, the children 
will benefit. This may explain a good deal of the variation we find in 
children of divorce. 

Is cohabitation and remarriage more difficult than divorce for 
the child? The remarriage of a parent may be a more difficult 
adjustment for a child than the divorce of a parent (Seccombe & 


Warner, 2004). Parents and children typically have different ideas of 
how the stepparent should act. Parents and stepparents are more 
likely to see the stepparent’s role as that of parent. A more 
democratic style of parenting may become more authoritarian after 
a parent remarries. Biological parents are more likely to continue 
to be involved with their children jointly when neither parent has 
remarried. They are least likely to jointly be involved if the father 
has remarried and the mother has not. Cohabitation can be difficult 
for children to adjust to because cohabiting relationships in the 
United States tend to be short-lived. About 50 percent last less 
than 2 years (Brown, 2000). The child who starts a relationship 
with the parent’s live-in partner may have to sever this relationship 
later. Even in long-term cohabiting relationships, once it is over, 
continued contact with the child is rare. 

Blended Families: One in six children (16%) live in blended families 
(Pew Research Center, 2015). As can be seen in Figure 5.27, Hispanic, 
black and white children are equally likely to be living in a blended 
family. In contrast, children of Asian descent are more likely to 
be living with two married parents, often in their first marriage. 


Blended families are not new. In the 1700-1800s there were many 
blended families, but they were created because someone died and 
remarried. Most blended families today are a result of divorce and 
remarriage, and such origins lead to new considerations. Blended 
families are different from intact families and more complex in a 
number of ways that can pose unique challenges to those who seek 
to form successful blended family relationships (Visher & Visher, 
1985). Children may be a part of two households, each with different 
rules that can be confusing. 

Figure 5.27 


Members in blended families may not be as sure that others care 
and may require more demonstrations of affection for reassurance. 
For example, stepparents expect more gratitude and 
acknowledgment from the stepchild than they would with a 
biological child. Stepchildren experience more uncertainty/
insecurity in their relationship with the parent and fear the parents 
will see them as sources of tension. Stepparents may feel guilty 
for a lack of feelings they may initially have toward their partner’s 
children. Children who are required to respond to the parent’s new 
mate as though they were the child’s “real” parent often react with 
hostility, rebellion, or withdrawal. This occurs especially if there has 
not been time for the relationship to develop. 

References 

Aiken, L. R. (1994). Psychological testing and assessment (8th ed.). 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 

Alloway, T. P. (2009). Working memory, but not IQ, predicts 
subsequent learning in children with learning difficulties. 
European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 25, 92-98. 

Alloway, T. P., Bibile, V., & Lau, G. (2013). Computerized working 
memory training: Can lead to gains in cognitive skills in students? 
Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 632-638. 

American Civil Liberties Union (2016). Overview of lesbian and gay 
parenting, adoption and foster care. Retrieved from 
https://www.aclu.org/fact-sheet/overview-lesbian-and-gay-
parenting-adoption-and-foster-care?redirect=overviewlesbian-
and-gay-parenting-adoption-and-foster-care 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Association. 

American Speech-Language and Hearing Association. (2016). Voice 
disorders. Retrieved from http://www.asha.org/PracticePortal/


Clinical-Topics/Voice-Disorders/ Arditti, J. A. (1999). Rethinking 
relationships between divorced mothers and their children: 
Capitalizing on family strengths. Family Relations, 48, 109-119. 

Anderson, J. (2018). The impact of family structure on the health of 
children: Effects of divorce. The Linacre Quarterly 81(4), 378–387. 

Arkowicz, H., & Lilienfeld. (2013). Is divorce bad for children? 
Scientific American Mind, 24(1), 68-69. Figure 5.27 206 

Asher, S. R., & Hymel, S. (1981). Children’s social competence in peer 
relations: Sociometric and behavioral assessment. In J. K. Wine 
& M. D. Smye (Eds.), Social competence (pp. 125-157). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Banaschewski, T., Becker, K., Döpfner, M., Holtmann, M., Rösler, M., 
& Romanos, M. (2017). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. A 
current overview. Deutsches Ärzteblatt International, 114, 149-159. 

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of 
behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84, 191-215. 

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social 
cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: 
Freeman. 

Barnett, N. P., Smoll, F. L., & Smith, R. E. (1992). Effects of enhancing 
coach-athlete relationships on youth sport attrition. The Sport 
Psychologist, 6, 111-127. 

Barbaresi, W. J., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L., Voigt, R. G., Killian, 
J. M., & Katusic, S. K. (2013). Mortality, ADHD, and psychosocial 
adversity in adults with childhood ADHD: A prospective study. 
Pediatrics, 131, 637–644. 

Barkley, R. A. (2006). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A 
handbook for diagnosis and treatment. New York, NY: Guilford 
Press. 

Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Smallish, L., & Fletcher, K. (2002). The 
persistence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder into 
young adulthood as a function of reporting source and definition 
of disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 279–289. 


Beaulieu, C. (2004). Intercultural study of personal space: A case 
study. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(4), 794-805. 

Berk, L. (2007). Development through the life span (4th ed.). Boston: 
Allyn and Bacon. Berger, K. S. (2014). The developing person: 
Through the life span. NY: Worth Publishers. 

Bigelow, B. J. (1977). Children’s friendship expectations: A cognitive 
developmental study. Child Development, 48, 246–253. 

Bigelow, B. J., & La Gaipa, J. J. (1975). Children’s written descriptions 
of friendship: A multidimensional analysis. Developmental 
Psychology, 11(6), 857-858. 

Binet, A., Simon, T., & Town, C. H. (1915). A method of measuring 
the development of the intelligence of young children (3rd ed.) 
Chicago, IL: Chicago Medical Book. 

Bink, M. L., & Marsh, R. L. (2000). Cognitive regularities in creative 
activity. Review of General Psychology, 4(1), 59–78. 

Bjorklund, D. F. (2005). Children’s thinking: Developmental function 
and individual differences (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Black, J. A., Park, M., Gregson, J. (2015). Child obesity cut-offs as 
derived from parental perceptions: Cross-sectional 
questionnaire. British Journal of General Practice, 65, e234-e239. 

Boulton, M. J. (1999). Concurrent and longitudinal relations between 
children’s playground behavior and social preference, 
victimization, and bullying. Child Development, 70, 944-954. 

Brody, N. (2003). Construct validation of the Sternberg Triarchic 
Abilities Test: Comment and reanalysis. Intelligence, 31(4), 
319–329. 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: 
Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
Univeristy Press. 

Brown, S. L. (2000). Union transitions among cohabitors: The 
significance of relationship assessments and expectations. 
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 833-846. 207 

Bruning, R. H., Schraw, G. J., Norby, M. M., & Ronning, R. R. (2004). 
Cognitive psychology and instruction. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson. 


Burt, S. A. (2009). Rethinking environmental contributions to child 
and adolescent psychopathology: A meta-analysis of shared 
environmental influences. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 608–637. 

Carlson, N. (2013). Physiology of behavior. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education. 

Carlson, S. M., & Zelazo, P. D., & Faja, S. (2013). Executive function. 
In P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of developmental 
psychology, Vol. 1: Body and mind (pp. 706-743). New York: Oxford 
University Press 

Camarota, S. A., & Zeigler, K. (2015). One in five U. S. residents speaks 
foreign language at home. Retrieved from https://cis.org/sites/
default/files/camarota-language-15.pdf 

Cazden, C. (2001). Classroom discourse, (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, NH: 
Heineman Publishers. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). 2000 CDC 
growth charts for the United States: Methods and development. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_11/
sr11_246.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2010, November 12). 
Increasing prevalence of parent reported attentiondeficit/
hyperactivity disorder among children, United States, 2003–2007. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 59(44), 1439–1443. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Birth defects. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/
downsyndrome/data.html 

Chao, R. (2001). Extending research on the consequences of 
parenting styles for Chinese Americans and European Americans. 
Child Development, 72, 1832-1843. 

Cillesen, A. H., & Mayeaux, L. (2004). From censure to reinforcement: 
Developmental changes in the association between aggression 
and social status. Child Development, 75, 147-163. 

Clark, M. L., & Bittle, M. L. (1992). Friendship expectations and the 
evaluation of present friendships in middle childhood and early 
adolescence. Child Study Journal, 22, 115–135. 

Clay, R. A. (2013). Psychologists are using research-backed 


behavioral interventions that effectively treat children with 
ADHD. Monitor on Psychology, 44(2), 45-47. 

Cohen, E. (2004). Teaching cooperative learning: The challenge for 
teacher education. Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Press. 

Colangelo, N., & Assouline, S. (2009). Acceleration: Meeting the 
academic and social needs of students. In T. Balchin, B. Hymer, & 
D. J. Matthews (Eds.), The Routledge international companion to 
gifted education (pp. 194–202). New York, NY: Routledge. 

Cowan, R., & Powell, D. (2014). The contributions of domain-general 
and numerical factors to third-grade arithmetic skills and 
mathematical learning disability. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 106, 214-229. 

Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development (5th ed.). Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson. 

Davidson, T. L. (2014). Do impaired memory and body weight 
regulation originate in childhood with diet-induced hippocampal 
dysfunction? The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 99(5), 
971-972. 

Davidson, T. L., Hargrave, S. L., Swithers, S. E., Sample, C. H., Fu, 
X., Kinzig, K. P., & Zheng, W. (2013). Inter-relationships among 
diet, obesity, and hippocampal-dependent cognitive function. 
Neuroscience, 253, 110-122. 

de Ribaupierre, A. (2002). Working memory and attentional 
processes across the lifespan. In P. Graf & N. Ohta (Eds.), Lifespan 
of development of human memory (pp. 59-80). Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press. 208 

Discover Esports. (2017). What are esports? Retrieved from 
https://discoveresports.com/what-are-esports/ 

Doolen, J., Alpert, P. T. and Miller, S. K. (2009), Parental disconnect 
between perceived and actual weight status of children: A 
metasynthesis of the current research. Journal of the American 
Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 21, 160–166. doi:10.1111/
j.1745-7599.2008.00382.x 

Drexler, P. (2005). Raising boys without men. Emmaus, PA: Rodale. 


Dutton, E., van der Linden, D., Lynn, R. (2016). The negative Flynn 
effect: A systematic literature review. Intelligence, 59, 163- 169. 
Ennis, R. H. (1987). A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and 
abilities. In J. Baron & R. Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching thinking skills: 
Theory and practice (pp. 9-26). New York: Freeman. 

Ericsson, K. (1998). The scientific study of expert levels of 
performance: General implications for optimal learning and 
creativity. High Ability Studies, 9(1), 75–100. 

Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed. NY: Norton & Company. 

Flynn, J. R. (1999). Searching for justice: The discovery of IQ gains 
over time. American Psychologist, 54(1), 5–20. 

Francis, N. (2006). The development of secondary discourse ability 
and metalinguistic awareness in second language learners. 
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 16, 37-47. 

Fraser-Thomas, J. L., Côté, J., & Deakin, J. (2005). Youth sport 
programs: An avenue to foster positive youth development. 
Physical Education & Sport Pedagogy, 10, 19-40. 

Furnham, A., & Bachtiar, V. (2008). Personality and intelligence as 
predictors of creativity. Personality and Individual Differences, 
45(7), 613–617. 

Furstenberg, F. F., & Cherlin, A. J. (1991). Divided families: What 
happens to children when parents part. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple 
intelligences. New York: Basic Books. 

Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for 
the 21st century. New York, NY: Basic Books. 

Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and 
women’s development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Gizer, I. R., Ficks, C., & Waldman, I. D. (2009). Candidate gene studies 
of ADHD: A meta-analytic review. Human Genetics, 126, 51–90. 

Gottfredson, L. S. (1997). Mainstream science on intelligence: An 
editorial with 52 signatories, history and bibliography. 
Intelligence, 24(1), 13–23. 


Gottfredson, L. S. (2003). Dissecting practical intelligence theory: Its 
claims and evidence. Intelligence, 31(4), 343–397. 

Greenspan, S., Loughlin, G., & Black, R. S. (2001). Credulity and 
gullibility in people with developmental disorders: A framework 
for future research. In L. M. Glidden (Ed.), Internationalreview 
ofresearch in mental retardation (Vol. 24, pp. 101–135). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 

Guttmann, J. (1993). Divorce in psychosocial perspective: Theory 
and research. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates. 

Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social 
intuitionist approach to moral judgment. Psychological Review, 
108(4), 814–834. 

Hales, C.M., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Ogden, C.L. (2017). 
Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: United States, 
2015–2016. NCHS data brief, no 288. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics. 209 

Halpern, D. F. (1992). Sex differences in cognitive abilities (2nd ed.). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Hansen, L., Umeda, Y., & McKinney, M. (2002). Savings in the 
relearning of second language vocabulary: The effects of time and 
proficiency. Language Learning, 52, 653-663. 

Hartup, W. W. (1983). Adolescents and their friends. New Directions 
for Child and Adolescent Development, 60, 3-22. 

Hennessey, B. A., & Amabile, T. M. (2010). Creativity. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 61, 569–598. 

Hetherington, E. M., & Kelly, J. (2002). For better or for worse: 
Divorce reconsidered. New York: W.W. Norton. 

Horvat, E. M. (2004). Moments of social inclusion and exclusion: 
Race, class, and cultural capital in family-school relationships. In 
A. Lareau (Author) & J. H. Ballantine & J. Z. Spade (Eds.), Schools 
and society: A sociological approach to education (2nd ed., pp. 
276-286). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Hoza, B., Mrug, S., Gerdes, A. C., Hinshaw, S. P., Bukowski, W. M., 
Gold, J. A., . . . Arnold, L. E. (2005). What aspects of peer 


relationships are impaired in children with ADHD? Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 411–423. 

Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from 
childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic Books. 

Jaffee, S., & Hyde, J. S. (2000). Gender differences in moral 
orientation: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 126(5), 703– 
726. 

Jimenez, R., Garcia, G., & Pearson. D. (1995). Three children, two 
languages, and strategic reading: Case studies in bilingual/
monolingual reading. American Educational Research Journal, 32 
(1), 67-97. Johnson, D., & Johnson, R. (1998). Learning together and 
alone: Cooperative, competitive, and individualistic learning, (5th 
ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Johnson, M. (2005). Developmental neuroscience, 
psychophysiology, and genetics. In M. Bornstein & M. Lamb (Eds.), 
Developmental science: An advanced textbook (5th ed., pp. 
187-222). 

Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Johnson, W., Carothers, A., & Deary, I. J. 
(2009). A role for the X chromosome in sex differences in 
variability in general intelligence? Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 4(6), 598–611. 

Kail, R. V., McBride-Chang, C., Ferrer, E., Cho, J.R., & Shu, H. (2013). 
Cultural differences in the development of processing speed. 
Developmental Science, 16, 476-483. 

Katz, D. L. (2015). Oblivobesity: Looking over the overweight that 
parents keep overlooking. Childhood Obesity, 11(3), 225- 226. 

Klein, R. G., Mannuzza, S., Olazagasti, M. A. R., Roizen, E., Hutchison, 
J. A., Lashua, E. C., & Castellanos, F. X. (2012). Clinical and 
functional outcome of childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder 33 years later. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 
1295–1303. 

Klima, T., & Repetti, R. L. (2008). Children’s peer relations and their 
psychological adjustment: Differences between close friends and 
the larger peer group. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 54, 151-178. 

Kohlberg, L. (1963). The development of children’s orientations 


toward a moral order: Sequence in the development of moral 
thought. Vita Humana, 16, 11-36. 

Kohlberg, L. (1984). The psychology of moral development: Essays on 
moral development (Vol. 2, p. 200). San Francisco, CA: Harper & 
Row. 

Kohnert, K., Yim, D., Nett, K., Kan, P., & Duran, L. (2005). Intervention 
with linguistically diverse preschool children. Language, Speech, 
and Hearing Services in Schools, 36, 251-263. 

Lally, M. J., & Valentine-French, S. J. (2018). Introduction to 
Psychology [Adapted from Charles Stangor, Introduction to 
Psychology] Grayslake, IL: College of Lake County. 210 

Liang, J., Matheson, B., Kaye, W., & Boutelle, K. (2014). 
Neurocognitive correlates of obesity and obesity-related 
behaviors in children and adolescents. International Journal of 
Obesity, 38(4), 494-506 

Linnet, K. M., Dalsgaard, S., Obel, C., Wisborg, K., Henriksen, T. B., 
Rodriquez, A., . . . Jarvelin, M. R.(2003). Maternal lifestyle factors 
in pregnancy risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and 
associated behaviors: A review of current evidence. The American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1028–1040. 

Livingston, G. (2018). About one-third of U.S. children are living 
with an unmarried parent. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/27/about-
one-third-of-u-s-children-are-living-with-an-
unmarriedparent/ 

Loe, I. M., & Feldman, H. M. (2007). Academic and educational 
outcomes of children with ADHD. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 
32, 643–654. 

Lofquist, D. (2011). Same-sex households. Current population 
reports, ACSBR/10-03. U.S. CensusBureau, Washington, DC. 
Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/
acsbr10-03.pdf 

Lu, S. (2016). Obesity and the growing brain. Monitor on Psychology, 
47(6), 40-43. 

Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2006). Study of mathematically 


precocious youth after 35 years: Uncovering antecedents for the 
development of math-science expertise. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 1(4), 316–345. 

Macbeth, D. (2003). Hugh Mehan’s Learning Lessons reconsidered: 
On the differences between naturalistic and critical analysis of 
classroom discourse. American Educational Research Journal, 40 
(1), 239-280. 

Markant, J. C., & Thomas, K. M. (2013). Postnatal brain development. 
In P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), Oxford handbook of developmental 
psychology. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Marshal, M. P., & Molina, B. S. G. (2006). Antisocial behaviors 
moderate the deviant peer pathway to substance use in children 
with ADHD. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 
35, 216–226. 

McCann, D., Barrett, A., Cooper, A., Crumpler, D., Dalen, L., 
Grimshaw, K., . . . Stevenson, J. (2007). Food additives and 
hyperactive behaviour in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children 
in the community: A randomised, double-blinded, placebo-
controlled trial. The Lancet, 370(9598), 1560–1567. 

McGuine, T. A. (2016). The association of sports specialization and 
history of lower extremity injury in high school athletes. Medical 
Science in Sports and Exercise, 45 (supplement 5), 866. 

McLanahan, S., & Sandefur, G. D. (1994). Growing up with a single 
parent: What hurts, what helps. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Medline Plus. (2016a). Phonological disorder. National Institute of 
Mental Health: U.S. National Library of Medicine. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001541.htm 

Medline Plus. (2016b). Speech and communication disorders. 
National Institute of Mental Health: U.S. National Library of 
Medicine. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/
speechandcommunicationdisorders.html 

Medline Plus. (2016c). Stuttering. National Institute of Mental 
Health: U.S. National Library of Medicine. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001427.htm 


Miller, P. H. (2000). How best to utilize a deficiency? Child 
Development, 71, 1013-1017. 

Minami, M. (2002). Culture-specific language styles: The 
development of oral narrative and literacy. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 

National Center for Learning Disabilities. (2017). The state of LD: 
Understanding the 1 in 5. Retrieved from https://www.ncld.org/
archives/blog/the-state-of-ld-understanding-the-1-in-5 

National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. (2016). 
Dyslexia information page. Retrieved from 
https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/All-Disorders/Dyslexia-
Information-Page 211 

National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders. 
(2016). Stuttering. Retrieved from https://www.nidcd.nih.gov/
health/stuttering 

Neisser, U. (1997). Rising scores on intelligence tests. American 
Scientist, 85, 440-447. 

Neisser, U. (1998). The rising curve. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Oude Luttikhuis, H., Stolk, R. and Sauer, P. (2010), How do parents 
of 4- to 5-year-old children perceive the weight of their children? 
Acta Pædiatrica, 99, 263–267. doi:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2009.01576.x 

Patterson, C. J. (2013). Children of lesbian and gay parents: 
Psychology, law, and Policy. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and 
Gender Diversity, 1, 27-34. 

Pettit, G. S., Clawson, M. A., Dodge, K. A., & Bates, J. E. (1996). 
Stability and change in peer-rejected status: The role of child 
behavior, parenting, and family ecology. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 
42(2), 267-294. 

Pew Research Center. (2010). New family types. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/11/18/vi-new-
familytypes/ 

Pew Research Center. (2015). Parenting in America. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/wpcontent/uploads/sites/3/
2015/12/2015-12-17_parenting-in-america_FINAL.pdf 


Plante, I., De la Sablonnière, R., Aronson, J. M., & Théorêt, M. (2013). 
Gender stereotype endorsement and achievement-related 
outcomes: The role of competence beliefs and task values. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 38(3), 225-235. 

PreBler, A., Krajewski, K., & Hasselhorn, M. (2013). Working memory 
capacity in preschool children contributes to the acquisition of 
school relevant precursor skills. Learning and Individual 
Differences, 23, 138-144. 

Public Law 93-112, 87 Stat. 394 (Sept. 26, 1973). Rehabilitation Act of 
1973. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office. 

Public Law 101-336, 104 Stat. 327 (July 26, 1990). Americans with 
Disabilities Act of 1990. Washington, D.C.: United States 
Government Printing Office. 

Public Law 108-446, 118 Stat. 2647 (December 3, 2004). Individuals 
with Disabilities Education Improvement Act. Washington, D.C.: 
United States Government Printing Office. 

Reid, S. (2017). 4 questions for Mitch Prinstein. Monitor on 
Psychology, 48(8), 31-32. 

Rest, J. (1979). Development in judging moral issues. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 

Retelsdorf, J., Asbrock, F., & Schwartz, K. (2015). “Michael can’t read!” 
teachers’ gender stereotypes and boys’ reading selfconcept. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 186-194. 

Richter, D, & Lemola, S. (2017). Growing up with a single mother and 
life satisfaction in adulthood: A test of mediating and moderating 
factors. PLOS ONE 12(6): e0179639. Retrieved from 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0179639 

Rogers, R., Malancharuvil-Berkes, E., Mosely, M., Hui, D., & O’Garro, 
G. (2005). Critical discourse analysis in education: A review of the 
literature. Review of Educational Research, 75 (3), 365-416. 

Rogoff, B. (2003). The culture of human development. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Rolls, E. (2000). Memory systems in the brain. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 51, 599-630. 


Ross, H. S., & Lollis, S. P. (1989). A social relations analysis of toddler 
peer relations. Child Development, 60, 1082-1091. 

Rubin, R. (1980). Children’s friendships. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Sabo, D., & Veliz, P. (2008). Go out and play: Youth sports in America. 
East Meadow, NY: Women’s Sports Foundation 212 

Sarafrazi, N., Hughes, J. P., & Borrud, L. (2014). Perception of weight 
status in U.S. children and adolescents aged 8-15 years, 
2005-2012. NCHS Data Brief, 158, 1-8. 

Schneider, W., Kron-Sperl, V., & Hünnerkopf, M. (2009). The 
development of young children’s memory strategies: Evidence 
from the Würzburg Longitudinal Memory Study. European 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6, 70-99. 

Schneider, W., & Pressley, M. (1997). Memory development between 
2 and 20. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Schwartz, D., Lansford, J. E., Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., & Bates, J. 
E. (2014). Peer victimization during middle childhood as a lead 
indicator of internalizing problems and diagnostic outcomes in 
late adolescence. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent 
Psychology, 44, 393-404. 

Seagoe, M. V. (1975). Terman and the gifted. Los Altos, CA: William 
Kaufmann. 

Seccombe, K., & Warner, R. L. (2004). Marriages and families: 
Relationships in social context. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/
Thomson Learning. 

Seifert, K. (2011). Educational psychology. Houston, TX: Rice 
University. 

Selman, Robert L. (1980). The growth of interpersonal 
understanding. London: Academic Press. 

Siegler, R. S. (1992). The other Alfred Binet. Developmental 
Psychology, 28(2), 179–190. 

Simonton, D. K. (1992). The social context of career success and 
course for 2,026 scientists and inventors. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 18(4), 452–463. 

Simonton, D. K. (2000). Creativity: Cognitive, personal, 


developmental, and social aspects. American Psychologist, 55(1), 
151– 158. 

Sodian, B., & Schneider, W. (1999). Memory strategy development: 
Gradual increase, sudden insight or roller coaster? In F. E. 
Weinert & W. Schneider (Eds.), Individual development from 3 
to 12: Findings from the Munich Longitudinal Study (pp. 61-77). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Sourander, A., Sucksdorff, M., Chudal, R, Surcel, H., Hinkka-Yli-
Salomäki, S., Gyllenberg, D., Cheslack-Postava, K., & Brown, A. 
(2019). Prenatal cotinine levels and ADHD among offspring. 
Pediatrics, 143(3), e20183144. 

Sport Policy and Research Collaborative (SPARC, 2013). What is the 
status of youth coach training in the U.S.? University of Florida. 
Retrieved from https://assets.aspeninstitute.org/content/
uploads/files/content/upload/
Project%20Play%20Research%20Brief%20Coach 
ing%20Education%20–%20FINAL.pdf 

Sport Policy and Research Collaborative (SPARC, 2016). State of play 
2016: Trends and developments. The Aspen Institute. Retrieved 
from https://www.aspeninstitute.org/publications/state-
play-2016-trends-developments/ 

Spreen, O., Rissser, A., & Edgell, D. (1995). Developmental 
neuropsychology. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of human 
intelligence. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Sternberg, R. J. (2003). Contemporary theories of intelligence. In 
W. M. Reynolds & G. E. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: 
Educational psychology (Vol. 7, pp. 23–45). Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons. 

Sternberg, R. J., Wagner, R. K., & Okagaki, L. (1993). Practical 
intelligence: The nature and role of tacit knowledge in work and 
at school. In J. M. Puckett & H. W. Reese (Eds.), Mechanisms of 
everyday cognition (pp. 205–227). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 

Stewart, A. J., Copeland, Chester, Malley, & Barenbaum. (1997). 


Separating together: How divorce transforms families. New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Stewart, S. M. & Bond, M. H. (2002), A critical look at parenting 
research from the mainstream: Problems uncovered while 
adapting Western research to non-Western cultures. British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, 379–392. doi:10.1348/
026151002320620389 213 

Stopbullying.gov. (2018). Preventing weight-based bullying. 
Retrieved from https://www.stopbullying.gov/blog/2018/11/05/
preventing-weight-based-bullying.html 

Swanson, J. M., Kinsbourne, M., Nigg, J., Lamphear, B., Stefanatos, 
G. A., Volkow, N., …& Wadhwa, P. D. (2007). Etiologic subtypes 
of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: brain imaging, 
molecular genetic and environmental factors and the dopamine 
hypothesis. Neuropsychological Review, 17(1), 39-59. 

Tarasova, I. V., Volf, N. V., & Razoumnikova, O. M. (2010). Parameters 
of cortical interactions in subjects with high and low levels of 
verbal creativity. Human Physiology, 36(1), 80–85. 

Terman, L. M., & Oden, M. H. (1959). Genetic studies of genius: The 
gifted group at mid-life (Vol. 5). Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. 

Thakur, G. A., Sengupta, S. M., Grizenko, N., Schmitz, N., Page, V., & 
Joober, R. (2013). Maternal smoking during pregnancy and ADHD: 
A comprehensive clinical and neurocognitive characterization. 
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 15, 149– 157. 

Tharp, R. & Gallimore, R. (1989). Rousing minds to life. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Thompson, A., Molina, B. S. G., Pelham, W., & Gnagy, E. M. (2007). 
Risky driving in adolescents and young adults with childhood 
ADHD. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 32, 745–759. 

Torres-Guzman, M. (1998). Language culture, and literacy in Puerto 
Rican communities. In B. Perez (Ed.), Sociocultural contexts of 
language and literacy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Treffert, D. A., & Wallace, G. L. (2004). Islands of genius. Scientific 


American, 14–23. Retrieved from http://gordonresearch.com/
articles_autism/SciAm-Islands_of_Genius.pdf 

Tse, L. (2001). Why don’t they learn English? New York: Teachers’ 
College Press. 

Turiel, E. (1998). The development of morality. In W. Damon (Ed.), 
Handbook of child psychology: Socialization (5th ed., Vol. 3, pp. 
863–932). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. 

United States Department of Education. (2017). Every Student 
Succeeds Act (ESSA). Retrieved from https://www.ed.gov/
essa?src=ft United States Youth Soccer. (2012). 

US youth soccer at a glance. Retrieved from 
http://www.usyouthsoccer.org/media_kit/ataglance/ 

Vakil, E., Blachstein, H., Sheinman, M., & Greenstein, Y. (2009). 
Developmental changes in attention tests norms: Implications for 
the structure of attention. Child Neuropsychology, 15, 21-39. 

van der Molen, M., & Molenaar, P. (1994). Cognitive 
psychophysiology: A window to cognitive development and brain 
maturation. In G. Dawson & K. Fischer (Eds.), Human behavior and 
the developing brain. New York: Guilford. 

Visher, E. B., & Visher, J. S. (1985). Stepfamilies are different. Journal 
of Family Therapy, 7(1), 9-18. 

Volkow N. D., Fowler J. S., Logan J., Alexoff D., Zhu W., Telang F., . 
. . Apelskog-Torres K. (2009). Effects of modafinil on dopamine 
and dopamine transporters in the male human brain: Clinical 
implications. Journal of the American Medical Association, 301, 
1148–1154. 

Wagner, R., & Sternberg, R. (1985). Practical intelligence in real-
world pursuits: The role of tacit knowledge. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 49(2), 436–458. 

Watkins, C. E., Campbell, V. L., Nieberding, R., & Hallmark, R. (1995). 
Contemporary practice of psychological assessment by clinical 
psychologists. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 
26(1), 54–60. 

Weaver, J. M., & Schofield, T. J. (2015). Mediation and moderation of 
divorce effects on children’s behavior problems. Journal of Family 


Psychology, 29(1), 39-48. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
fam0000043 214 

Weir, K. (2019). Family-based behavioral treatment is key to 
addressing childhood obesity. Monitor on Pscyhology, 50(4), 31- 
35. 

Weisberg, R. (2006). Creativity: Understanding innovation in 
problem solving, science, invention, and the arts. Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons. 

Wilens, E., Fararone, S.V., Biederman, J., & Gunawardene, S. (2003). 
Does the treatment of Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
with stimulants contribute to use/abuse? Pediatrics, 111(1), 97-109. 

Wolraich, M. L., Wilson, D. B., & White, J. W. (1995). The effect 
of sugar on behavior or cognition in children. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 274, 1617–1621. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 5 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


PART 
IX 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
ADOLESCENCE 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore and connect Psychosocial, Cognitive, 
and Psychosexual Development 
Explore and connect another Theory, Approach, 
or Perspective to work in critical thinking skills for 
client assessments 
Exploring important aspects of a person’s 
experience and ability to justify why they are 
important 



Vignette 

Maryam
Photo by Spencer Russell on Unsplash 

Maryam is the oldest daughter 
in a family of four children and a 
Junior at Alamo High 
School. 
Maryam’s mother is 
Superintendent of the school 
district and her father owns a 
thriving consultant 
company. 
Maryam is the 
president of the junior class, a 
starter on the basketball and 
volleyball teams, the secretary 
for the Spanish club, and a peer 
mentor at both school and 
church. 
She has met with the 
school counselor to discuss her 
plans to get into her first choice 
for college at Cornell University. 
When the counselor comments on her busy schedule, Maryam replies, 
“Well, I know but it’s what you have to do to get into a good school and 
I know what I want. I appreciate your help with the information, but 
I’ve got to go to class now, see you later!” The school counselor stops 
her before she leaves and inquires if Maryam would be open to 
meeting with the school Social Worker to explore some strategies for 
managing a busy schedule and Maryam shrugs and states, “sure, why 
not”. 

The Social Worker asks to meet with Maryam the following week 
to check in and see how she is doing. Maryam reports feeling fine. 
She states “I know I’m busy but if I want to achieve my goals, then I 
have to be. Colleges want to see all the stuff you’ve done, and I want to 
make sure it’s enough”. The Social Worker reflects this and her desire 
to accomplish her goals, and then asks how Maryam handles all the 
stress that comes along with being engaged in so many activities as 


well as any pressure she may feel about going to college. Maryam 
replies “I don’t know. Fine, I guess. I mean, I don’t sleep much because 
I’m constantly thinking of all the things I have to do the next day and 
making sure I get into Cornell, and sometimes my head hurts, but I 
think that’s just from all the reading I have to do, besides, don’t most 
kids my age feel this way? I mean I just don’t want to disappoint my 
parents. They’re really hoping I get into Cornell because that’s where 
they both went to school”. The Social Worker asks Maryam what she 
plans to major in and Maryam states “I’m not really sure. My mom 
thinks I should go into education like her and my dad thinks I should 
go into business or finance like him”. The Social Worker asks Maryam 
to take some time over the next week and think about what she would 
choose if it were completely her decision and did not feel pressure 
coming from anyone, and to meet again to discuss what she comes up 
with. Maryam is agreeable and schedules a time to meet the following 
week. 

Maryam arrives the following week, seeming a little more down. 
The Social Worker asks how she is doing, and she replies, “not so 
great”. The Social Worker explores this with Maryam and she states 
“That activity you had me do, it just really got to me because I didn’t 
think it would be so hard to think about what I actually wanted, not 
what my parents have wanted for me, but what I actually wanted”. 
She reported feeling more anxious over the past week, stating “I just 
couldn’t stop thinking about it and feeling like I should know, I mean, 
who doesn’t know what they would want to do if they could do 
anything they wanted? I also noticed I wasn’t as motivated to do 
any of my normal extracurricular activities, except for running, that 
always makes me feel better”. The Social Worker discussed how her 
feelings were actually very normal for someone her age, as well as 
for many people trying to find “the perfect fit” and shared this is 
something that takes time and this being ok as well. Maryam reported 
feeling some relief hearing this and asked to meet with the Social 
Worker again. 


Critical Thinking: 

1. What stage of Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive 
Development is the client currently in? Are they 
meeting expectations of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any delays in this stage? 
Examples? 
2. What stage of Erikson’s Theory of Psychosocial 
Development are they currently in? Are they 
meeting the goals of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any struggles with their goals 
in this stage? Examples? 
3. What theory, approach, or perspective from 
previous Dimensions (PIE, Biopsychosocial, 
Sociocultural, or Social Change) would you use to 
assess this client? Why? 
4. What do you feel are the most important 
aspects (physical development, attachment, sexual 
development, etc) to consider for this client? 
Why? 


References 

Hutchinson, E. D. (2019). Dimensions of human behavior (Sixth 
edition). Sage Publications, Inc. 

 



Chapter 19: Physical 
Development in Adolescence 

Chapter 19 Learning Objectives 

Summarize the overall physical growth 
Describe the changes that occur during puberty 
Describe the changes in brain maturation 
Describe the changes in sleep 
Describe gender intensification 
Identify nutritional concerns 
Describe eating disorders 
Explain the prevalence, risk factors, and 
consequences of adolescent pregnancy 


Growth in Adolescence 

Puberty is a period of rapid growth and sexual maturation. These 
changes begin sometime between eight and fourteen. Girls begin 
puberty at around ten years of age and boys begin approximately 
two years later. Pubertal changes take around three to four years to 
complete. Adolescents experience an overall physical growth spurt. 
The growth proceeds from the extremities toward the torso. This 


is referred to as distalproximal development. First the hands grow, 
then the arms, and finally the torso. The overall physical growth 
spurt results in 10-11 inches of added height and 50 to 75 pounds 
of increased weight. The head begins to grow sometime after the 
feet have gone through their period of growth. Growth of the head 
is preceded by growth of the ears, nose, and lips. The difference in 
these patterns of growth result in adolescents appearing awkward 
and out-of-proportion. As the torso grows, so does the internal 
organs. The heart and lungs experience dramatic growth during this 
period. 

During childhood, boys and girls are quite similar in height and 
weight. However, gender differences become apparent during 
adolescence. From approximately age ten to fourteen, the average 
girl is taller, but not heavier, than the average boy. After that, the 
average boy becomes both taller and heavier, although individual 
differences are certainly noted. As adolescents physically mature, 
weight differences are more noteworthy than height differences. At 
eighteen years of age, those that are heaviest weigh almost twice as 
much as the lightest, but the tallest teens are only about 10% taller 
than the shortest (Seifert, 2012). 

Both height and weight can certainly be sensitive issues for some 
teenagers. Most modern societies, and the teenagers in them, tend 
to favor relatively short women and tall men, as well as a somewhat 
thin body build, especially for girls and women. Yet, neither socially 
preferred height nor thinness is the destiny for many individuals. 
Being overweight, in particular, has become a common, serious 
problem in modern society due to the prevalence of diets high in 
fat and lifestyles low in activity (Tartamella, Herscher, & Woolston, 
2004). The educational system has, unfortunately, contributed to 
the problem as well by gradually restricting the number of physical 
education courses and classes in the past two decades. 

Average height and weight are also related somewhat to racial and 
ethnic background. In general, children of Asian background tend to 
be slightly shorter than children of European and North American 
background. The latter in turn tend to be shorter than children 


from African societies (Eveleth & Tanner, 1990). Body shape differs 
slightly as well, though the differences are not always visible until 
after puberty. Asian background youth tend to have arms and legs 
that are a bit short relative to their torsos, and African background 
youth tend to have relatively long arms and legs. The differences are 
only averages, as there are large individual differences as well. 

Sexual Development 

Typically, the growth spurt is followed by the development of sexual 
maturity. Sexual changes are divided into two categories: Primary 
sexual characteristics and secondary sexual characteristics. 
Primary sexual characteristics are changes in the reproductive 
organs. For males, this includes growth of the testes, penis, 
scrotum, and spermarche or first ejaculation of semen. This occurs 
between 11 and 15 years of age. For females, primary characteristics 
include growth of the uterus and menarche or the first menstrual 
period. The female gametes, which are stored in the ovaries, are 
present at birth, but are immature. Each ovary contains about 
400,000 gametes, but only 500 will become mature eggs (Crooks & 
Baur, 2007). Beginning at puberty, one ovum ripens and is released 
about every 28 days during the menstrual cycle. Stress and higher 
percentage of body fat can bring menstruation at younger ages. 

Male Anatomy: Males have both internal and external genitalia 
that are responsible for procreation and sexual intercourse. Males 
produce their sperm on a cycle, and unlike the female’s ovulation 
cycle, the male sperm production cycle is constantly producing 
millions of sperm daily. The main male sex organs are the penis and 
the testicles, the latter of which produce semen and sperm. The 
semen and sperm, as a result of sexual intercourse, can fertilize an 
ovum in the female’s body; the fertilized ovum (zygote) develops into 
a fetus which is later born as a child. 

Figure 6.1 


Figure 6.2 

Female Anatomy: Female external genitalia is collectively known 


internal reproductive organs consist of the vagina, uterus, fallopian 
tubes, and ovaries. The uterus hosts the developing fetus, produces 
as the vulva, which includes the mons veneris, labia majora, labia 
minora, clitoris, vaginal opening, and urethral opening. Female 
vaginal and uterine secretions, and passes the male’s sperm through 
to the fallopian tubes while the ovaries release the eggs. A female is 
born with all her eggs already produced. The vagina is attached to 
the uterus through the cervix, while the uterus is attached to the 
ovaries via the fallopian tubes. Females have a monthly reproductive 
cycle; at certain intervals the ovaries release an egg, which passes 
through the fallopian tube into the uterus. If, in this transit, it meets 
with sperm, the sperm might penetrate and merge with the egg, 
fertilizing it. If not fertilized, the egg is flushed out of the system 
through menstruation. 

Secondary sexual characteristics are visible physical changes not 
directly linked to reproduction but signal sexual maturity. For males 
this includes broader shoulders and a lower voice as the larynx 
grows. Hair becomes coarser and darker, and hair growth occurs in 
the pubic area, under the arms and on the face. For females, breast 
development occurs around age 10, although full development takes 
several years. Hips broaden, and pubic and underarm hair develops 
and also becomes darker and coarser. 


Acne: An unpleasant consequence of the hormonal changes in 
puberty is acne, defined as pimples on the skin due to overactive 
sebaceous (oil-producing) glands (Dolgin, 2011). These glands 
develop at a greater speed than the skin ducts that discharges the 
oil. Consequently, the ducts can become blocked with dead skin and 
acne will develop. According to the University of California at Los 
Angeles Medical Center (2000), approximately 85% of adolescents 
develop acne, and boys develop acne more than girls because of 
greater levels of testosterone in their systems (Dolgin, 2011). 
Experiencing acne can lead the adolescent to withdraw socially, 
especially if they are self-conscious about their skin or teased 
(Goodman, 2006). 

Effects of Pubertal Age: The age of puberty is getting younger 
for children throughout the world. According to Euling et al. (2008) 
data are sufficient to suggest a trend toward an earlier breast 
development onset and menarche in girls. A century ago the average 
age of a girl’s first period in the United States and Europe was 16, 
while today it is around 13. Because there is no clear marker of 
puberty for boys, it is harder to determine if boys are maturing 
earlier too. In addition to better nutrition, less positive reasons 
associated with early puberty for girls include increased stress, 
obesity, and endocrine-disrupting chemicals. 

Cultural differences are noted with Asian-American girls, on 
average, developing last, while African American girls enter puberty 
the earliest. Hispanic girls start puberty the second earliest, while 
European-American girls rank third in their age of starting puberty. 
Although African American girls are typically the first to develop, 
they are less likely to experience negative consequences of early 
puberty when compared to European-American girls (Weir, 2016). 

Research has demonstrated mental health problems linked to 
children who begin puberty earlier than their peers. For girls, early 
puberty is associated with depression, substance use, eating 
disorders, disruptive behavior disorders, and early sexual behavior 
(Graber, 2013). Early maturing girls demonstrate more anxiety and 
less confidence in their relationships with family and friends, and 


they compare themselves more negatively to their peers (Weir, 
2016). 

Problems with early puberty seem to be due to the mismatch 
between the child’s appearance and the way she acts and thinks. 
Adults especially may assume the child is more capable than she 
actually is, and parents might grant more freedom than the child’s 
age would indicate. For girls, the emphasis on physical 
attractiveness and sexuality is emphasized at puberty and they may 
lack effective coping strategies to deal with the attention they may 
receive. 

Additionally, mental health problems are more likely to occur 
when the child is among the first in his or her peer group to develop. 
Because the preadolescent time is one of not wanting to appear 
different, early developing children stand out among their peer 
group and gravitate toward those who are older. For girls, this 
results in them interacting with older peers who engage in risky 
behaviors such as substance use and early sexual behavior (Weir, 
2016). 


Boys also see changes in their emotional functioning at puberty. 
According to Mendle, Harden, Brooks-Gunn, and Graber (2010), 
while most boys experienced a decrease in depressive symptoms 
during puberty, boys who began puberty earlier and exhibited a 
rapid tempo, or a fast rate of change, actually increased in 
depressive symptoms. The effects of pubertal tempo were stronger 
than those of pubertal timing, suggesting that rapid pubertal change 
in boys may be a more important risk factor than the timing of 
development. In a further study to better analyze the reasons for 
this change, Mendle, Harden, Brooks-Gunn and Graber (2012) found 
that both early maturing boys and rapidly maturing boys displayed 
decrements in the quality of their peer relationships as they moved 
into early adolescence, whereas boys with more typical timing and 
tempo development actually experienced improvements in peer 
relationships. The researchers concluded that the transition in peer 
relationships may be especially challenging for boys whose pubertal 
maturation differs significantly from those of others their age. 
Consequences for boys attaining early puberty were increased odds 
of cigarette, alcohol, or another drug use (Dudovitz, et al., 2015). 

Gender Role Intensification: At about the same time that puberty 
accentuates gender, role differences also accentuate for at least 
some teenagers. Some girls who excelled at math or science in 
elementary school, may curb their enthusiasm and displays of 
success at these subjects for fear of limiting their popularity or 
attractiveness as girls (Taylor, Gilligan, & Sullivan, 1995; Sadker, 
2004). Some boys who were not especially interested in sports 
previously may begin dedicating themselves to athletics to affirm 
their masculinity in the eyes of others. Some boys and girls who 
once worked together successfully on class projects may no longer 
feel comfortable doing so, or alternatively may now seek to be 
working partners, but for social rather than academic reasons. Such 
changes do not affect all youngsters equally, nor affect any one 
youngster equally on all occasions. An individual may act like a 
young adult on one day, but more like a child the next. 


Adolescent Brain 

The brain undergoes dramatic changes during adolescence. 
Although it does not get larger, it matures by becoming more 
interconnected and specialized (Giedd, 2015). The myelination and 
development of connections between neurons continue. This 
results in an increase in the white matter of the brain and allows 
the adolescent to make significant improvements in their thinking 
and processing skills. Different brain areas become myelinated at 
different times. For example, the brain’s language areas undergo 
myelination during the first 13 years. Completed insulation of the 
axons consolidates these language skills but makes it more difficult 
to learn a second language. With greater myelination, however, 
comes diminished plasticity as a myelin coating inhibits the growth 
of new connections (Dobbs, 2012). 

Even as the connections between neurons are strengthened, 
synaptic pruning occurs more than during childhood as the brain 
adapts to changes in the environment. This synaptic pruning causes 
the gray matter of the brain, or the cortex, to become thinner but 


more efficient (Dobbs, 2012). The corpus callosum, which connects 
the two hemispheres, continues to thicken allowing for stronger 
connections between brain areas. Additionally, the hippocampus 
becomes more strongly connected to the frontal lobes, allowing for 
greater integration of memory and experiences into our decision 
making. 

The limbic system, which regulates emotion and reward, is linked 
to the hormonal changes that occur at puberty. The limbic system 
is also related to novelty seeking and a shift toward interacting 
with peers. In contrast, the prefrontal cortex which is involved in 
the control of impulses, organization, planning, and making good 
decisions, does not fully develop until the mid-20s. According to 
Giedd (2015) the significant aspect of the later developing prefrontal 
cortex and early development of the limbic system is the “mismatch” 
in timing between the two. The approximately ten years that 
separates the development of these two brain areas can result in 
risky behavior, poor decision making, and weak emotional control 
for the adolescent. When puberty begins earlier, this mismatch 
extends even further. 


Teens often take more risks than adults and according to research 
it is because they weigh risks and rewards differently than adults 
do (Dobbs, 2012). For adolescents the brain’s sensitivity to the 
neurotransmitter dopamine peaks, and dopamine is involved in 
reward circuits, so the possible rewards outweighs the risks. 
Adolescents respond especially strongly to social rewards during 
activities, and they prefer the company of others their same age. 
Chein et al. (2011) found that peers sensitize brain regions associated 
with potential rewards. For example, adolescent drivers make risky 
driving decisions when with friends to impress them, and teens 
are much more likely to commit crimes together in comparison 
to adults (30 and older) who commit them alone (Steinberg et al., 
2017). In addition to dopamine, the adolescent brain is affected by 
oxytocin which facilitates bonding and makes social connections 
more rewarding. With both dopamine and oxytocin engaged, it is 
no wonder that adolescents seek peers and excitement in their lives 
that could end up actually harming them. 

Because of all the changes that occur in the adolescent brain, 
the chances for abnormal development can occur, including mental 
illness. In fact, 50% of the mental illness occurs by the age 14 and 
75% occurs by age 24 (Giedd, 2015). Additionally, during this period 
of development the adolescent brain is especially vulnerable to 
damage from drug exposure. For example, repeated exposure to 
marijuana can affect cellular activity in the endocannabinoid 
system. Consequently, adolescents are more sensitive to the effects 
of repeated marijuana exposure (Weir, 2015). 

However, researchers have also focused on the highly adaptive 
qualities of the adolescent brain which allow the adolescent to move 
away from the family towards the outside world (Dobbs, 2012; Giedd, 
2015). Novelty seeking and risk taking can generate positive 
outcomes including meeting new people and seeking out new 
situations. Separating from the family and moving into new 
relationships and different experiences are actually quite adaptive 
for society. 


Adolescent Sleep 

According to the National Sleep Foundation (NSF) (2016), 
adolescents need about 8 to 10 hours of sleep each night to function 
best. The most recent Sleep in America poll in 2006 indicated that 
adolescents between sixth and twelfth grade were not getting the 
recommended amount of sleep. On average adolescents only 
received 7 ½ hours of sleep per night on school nights with younger 
adolescents getting more than older ones (8.4 hours for sixth 
graders and only 6.9 hours for those in twelfth grade). For the older 
adolescents, only about one in ten (9%) get an optimal amount of 
sleep, and they are more likely to experience negative consequences 
the following day. These include feeling too tired or sleepy, being 
cranky or irritable, falling asleep in school, having a depressed 
mood, and drinking caffeinated beverages (NSF, 2016). Additionally, 
they are at risk for substance abuse, car crashes, poor academic 
performance, obesity, and a weakened immune system (Weintraub, 
2016). 

Troxel et al. (2019) found that insufficient sleep in adolescents is 
a predictor of risky sexual behaviors. Reasons given for this include 
that those adolescents who stay out late, typically without parental 
supervision, are more likely to engage in a variety of risky behaviors, 
including risky sex, such as not using birth control or using 
substances before/during sex. An alternative explanation for risky 
sexual behavior is that the lack of sleep negatively affects impulsivity 
and decision-making processes. 

Why do adolescents not get adequate sleep? In addition to 
known environmental and social factors, including work, 
homework, media, technology, and socializing, the adolescent brain 
is also a factor. As adolescent go through puberty, their circadian 
rhythms change and push back their sleep time until later in the 
evening (Weintraub, 2016). This biological change not only keeps 
adolescents awake at night, it makes it difficult for them to wake 
up. When they are awake too early, their brains do not function 


optimally. Impairments are noted in attention, academic 
achievement, and behavior while increases in tardiness and 
absenteeism are also seen. 

To support adolescents’ later sleeping schedule, the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention recommended that school not 
begin any earlier than 8:30 a.m. Unfortunately, over 80% of 
American schools begin their day earlier than 8:30 a.m. with an 
average start time of 8:03 a.m. (Weintraub, 2016). Psychologists and 
other professionals have been advocating for later school times, 
and they have produced research demonstrating better student 
outcomes for later start times. More middle and high schools have 
changed their start times to better reflect the sleep research. 
However, the logistics of changing start times and bus schedules 
are proving too difficult for some schools leaving many adolescent 
vulnerable to the negative consequences of sleep deprivation. 
Troxel et al. (2019) cautions that adolescents should find a middle 
ground between sleeping too little during the school week and too 
much during the weekends. Keeping consistent sleep schedules of 
too little sleep will result in sleep deprivation but oversleeping on 


weekends can affect the natural biological sleep cycle making it 
harder to sleep on weekdays. 

Adolescent Sexual Activity 

By about age ten or eleven, most children experience increased 
sexual attraction to others that affects social life, both in school and 
out (McClintock & Herdt, 1996). By the end of high school, more than 
half of boys and girls report having experienced sexual intercourse 
at least once, though it is hard to be certain of the proportion 
because of the sensitivity and privacy of the information. (Center for 
Disease Control, 2004; Rosenbaum, 2006). 

Adolescent Pregnancy: As can be seen in Figure 6.8, in 2018 
females aged 15–19 years experienced a birth rate (live births) of 
17.4 per 1,000 women. The birth rate for teenagers has declined by 
58% since 2007 and 72% since 1991, the most recent peak (Hamilton, 
Joyce, Martin, & Osterman, 2019). It appears that adolescents seem 
to be less sexually active than in previous years, and those who are 
sexually active seem to be using birth control (CDC, 2016). 

Risk Factors for Adolescent Pregnancy: Miller, Benson, and 
Galbraith (2001) found that parent/child closeness, parental 
supervision, and parents’ values against teen intercourse (or 
unprotected intercourse) decreased the risk of adolescent 
pregnancy. In contrast, residing in disorganized/dangerous 
neighborhoods, living in a lower SES family, living with a single 
parent, having older sexually active siblings or pregnant/parenting 
teenage sisters, early puberty, and being a victim of sexual abuse 
place adolescents at an increased risk of adolescent pregnancy. 

Figure 6.8 


Consequences of Adolescent Pregnancy: After the child is born life 
can be difficult for a teenage mother. Only 40% of teenagers who 
have children before age 18 graduate from high school. Without a 
high school degree her job prospects are limited, and economic 
independence is difficult. Teen mothers are more likely to live in 
poverty, and more than 75% of all unmarried teen mother receive 
public assistance within 5 years of the birth of their first child. 
Approximately, 64% of children born to an unmarried teenage high-
school dropout live in poverty. Further, a child born to a teenage 
mother is 50% more likely to repeat a grade in school and is more 
likely to perform poorly on standardized tests and drop out before 
finishing high school (March of Dimes, 2012). 

Research analyzing the age that men father their first child and 
how far they complete their education have been summarized by 
the Pew Research Center (2015) and reflect the research for females. 


Among dads ages 22 to 44, 70% of those with less than a high 
school diploma say they fathered their first child before the age 
of 25. In comparison, less than half (45%) of fathers with some 
college experience became dads by that age. Additionally, becoming 
a young father occurs much less for those with a bachelor’s degree 
or higher as just 14% had their first child prior to age 25. Like 
men, women with more education are likely to be older when they 
become mothers. 

Eating Disorders 

Although eating disorders can occur in children and adults, they 
frequently appear during the teen years or young adulthood 
(National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), 2016). Eating disorders 
affect both genders, although rates among women are 2½ times 
greater than among men. Similar to women who have eating 
disorders, men also have a distorted sense of body image, including 
muscle dysmorphia, which is an extreme desire to increase one’s 
muscularity (Bosson, Vandello, & Buckner, 2019). The prevalence of 
eating disorders in the United States is similar among Non-Hispanic 
Whites, Hispanics, African-Americans, and Asians, with the 
exception that anorexia nervosa is more common among Non-
Hispanic Whites (Hudson, Hiripi, Pope, & Kessler, 2007; Wade, 
Keski-Rahkonen, & Hudson, 2011). 


Risk Factors for Eating Disorders: Because of the high mortality 
rate, researchers are looking into the etiology of the disorder and 
associated risk factors. Researchers are finding that eating 
disorders are caused by a complex interaction of genetic, biological, 
behavioral, psychological, and social factors (NIMH, 2016). Eating 
disorders appear to run in families, and researchers are working 
to identify DNA variations that are linked to the increased risk of 
developing eating disorders. Researchers from King’s College 
London (2019) found that the genetic basis of anorexia overlaps with 
both metabolic and body measurement traits. The genetic factors 
also influence physical activity, which may explain the high activity 
level of those with anorexia. Further, the genetic basis of anorexia 
overlaps with other psychiatric disorders. Researchers have also 
found differences in patterns of brain activity in women with eating 
disorders in comparison with healthy women. 

The main criteria for the most common eating disorders: Anorexia 


nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder are described 
in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Fifth 
Edition (DSM-5) (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) and listed 
in Table 6.1. 

Table 6.1 

Health Consequences of Eating Disorders: For those suffering from 
anorexia, health consequences include an abnormally slow heart 
rate and low blood pressure, which increases the risk for heart 
failure. Additionally, there is a reduction in bone density 
(osteoporosis), muscle loss and weakness, severe dehydration, 
fainting, fatigue, and overall weakness. Anorexia nervosa has the 
highest mortality rate of any psychiatric disorder (Arcelus, Mitchell, 
Wales, & Nielsen, 2011). Individuals with this disorder may die from 
complications associated with starvation, while others die of 
suicide. In women, suicide is much more common in those with 
anorexia than with most other mental disorders. 

The binge and purging cycle of bulimia can affect the digestives 
system and lead to electrolyte and chemical imbalances that can 
affect the heart and other major organs. Frequent vomiting can 
cause inflammation and possible rupture of the esophagus, as well 
as tooth decay and staining from stomach acids. Lastly, binge eating 


disorder results in similar health risks to obesity, including high 
blood pressure, high cholesterol levels, heart disease, Type II 
diabetes, and gall bladder disease (National Eating Disorders 
Association, 2016). 

Eating Disorders Treatment: To treat eating disorders, adequate 
nutrition and stopping inappropriate behaviors, such as purging, 
are the foundations of treatment. Treatment plans are tailored to 
individual needs and include medical care, nutritional counseling, 
medications (such as antidepressants), and individual, group, and/
or family psychotherapy (NIMH, 2016). For example, the Maudsley 
Approach has parents of adolescents with anorexia nervosa be 
actively involved in their child’s treatment, such as assuming 
responsibility for feeding the child. To eliminate binge-eating and 
purging behaviors, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) assists 
sufferers by identifying distorted thinking patterns and changing 
inaccurate beliefs. 


References 

Albert, D., & Steinberg, L. (2011). Adolescent judgment and decision 
making. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21, 211– 224. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (Fifth Edition). Washington, D. C.: 
Author. 

Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales, J., & Nielsen, S. (2011). Mortality 
rates in patients with anorexia nervosa and other eating 
disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(7), 724-731. 

Birkeland, M. S., Melkivik, O., Holsen, I., & Wold, B. (2012). 
Trajectories of global self-esteem during adolescence. Journal of 
Adolescence, 35, 43-54. 

Bosson, J. K., Vandello, J., & Buckner, C. (2019). The psychology of sex 
and gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Brass, N., McKellar, North, E., & Ryan, A. (2019). Early adolescents’ 
adjustment at school: A fresh look at grade and gender 
differences. Journal of Early Adolescence, 39(5), 689-716. 

Brown, B. B., & Larson, J. (2009). Peer relationships in adolescence. 
In R. M. Lerner & L. Steinberg (Eds.), Handbook of adolescent 
psychology (pp. 74–103). New York, NY: Wiley. 

Carney, C., McGehee, D., Harland, K., Weiss, M., & Raby, M. (2015, 
March). Using naturalistic driving data to assess the prevalence of 
environmental factors and driver behaviors in teen driver crashes. 
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety. Retrieved from 
https://www.aaafoundation.org/sites/default/files/
2015TeenCrashCausationReport.pdf 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Caspi, A., Lynam, D., Moffitt, T. E., & Silva, P. A. (1993). Unraveling 
girls’ delinquency: Biological, dispositional, and contextual 
contributions to adolescent misbehavior. Developmental 
Psychology, 29(1), 19-30. 


Center for Disease Control. (2004). Trends in the prevalence of 
sexual behaviors, 1991-2003. Bethesda, MD: Author. 

Center for Disease Control. (2016). Birth rates (live births) per 1,000 
females aged 15–19 years, by race and Hispanic ethnicity, select 
years. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/teenpregnancy/
about/birth-rates-chart-2000-2011-text.htm 

Centers for Disease Control. (2018a). Teen drivers: Get the facts. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/motorvehiclesafety/
teen_drivers/teendrivers_factsheet.html 

Centers for Disease Control. (2018b). Trends in the behaviors that 
contribute to unintentional injury: National Youth Risk Behavioral 
Survey. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/
data/yrbs/pdf/trends/
2017_unintentional_injury_trend_yrbs.pdf 

Chein, J., Albert, D., O’Brien, L., Uckert, K., & Steinberg, L. (2011). 
Peers increase adolescent risk taking by enhancing activity in the 
brain’s reward circuitry. Developmental Science, 14(2), F1-F10. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01035.x 

Chen, B., Vansteenkiste, M., Beyers, W., Soensens, B., & Van 
Petegem, S. (2013). Autonomy in family decision making for 
Chinese adolescents: Disentangling the dual meaning of 
autonomy. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 44, 1184- 1209. 

Connolly, J., Craig, W., Goldberg, A., & Pepler, D. (2004). Mixed-
gender groups, dating, and romantic relationships in early 
adolescence. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 14, 185-207. 

Connolly, J., Furman, W., & Konarski, R. (2000). The role of peers 
in the emergence of heterosexual romantic relationships in 
adolescence. Child Development, 71, 1395–1408. 

Costigan, C. L., Cauce, A. M., & Etchinson, K. (2007). Changes in 
African American mother-daughter relationships during 
adolescence: Conflict, autonomy, and warmth. In B. J. R. 
Leadbeater & N. Way (Eds.), Urban girls revisited: Building 
strengths (pp. 177-201). New York NY: New York University Press. 

Côtè, J. E. (2006). Emerging adulthood as an institutionalized 
moratorium: Risks and benefits to identity formation. In J. J. 


Arnett & J. T. Tanner (Eds.), Emerging adults in America: Coming 
of age in the 21st century, (pp. 85-116). Washington D.C.: American 
Psychological Association Press. 

Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development concepts and 
applications (5th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson. 

Crooks, K. L., & Baur, K. (2007). Our sexuality (10th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth. 

Crosnoe, R., & Benner, A. D. (2015). Children at school. In M. H. 
Bornstein, T. Leventhal, & R. M. Lerner (Eds.). Handbook of child 
psychology and developmental science: Ecological settings and 
processes (pp. 268-304). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 

De Wit, D. J., Karioja, K., Rye, B. J., & Shain, M. (2011). Perceptions of 
declining classmate and teacher support following the transition 
to high school: Potential correlates of increasing student mental 
health difficulties. Psychology in the Schools, 48, 556-572. 

Dishion, T. J., & Tipsord, J. M. (2011). Peer contagion in child and 
adolescent social and emotional development. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 62, 189–214. 

Dobbs, D. (2012). Beautiful brains. National Geographic, 220(4), 36. 
Dolgin, K. G. (2011). The adolescent: Development, relationships, 
and culture (13th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson. 

Duchesne, S., Larose, S., & Feng, B. (2019). Achievement goals and 
engagement with academic work in early high school: Does 
seeking help from teachers matter? Journal of Early Adolescence, 
39(2), 222-252. 

Dudovitz, R.N., Chung, P.J., Elliott, M.N., Davies, S.L., Tortolero, S,… 
Baumler, E. (2015). Relationship of age for grade and pubertal 
stage to early initiation of substance use. Preventing Chronic 
Disease, 12, 150234. doi:10.5888/pcd12.150234. 

Eccles, J. S., & Rosner, R. W. (2015). School and community 
influences on human development. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E. 
Lamb (Eds.), Developmental science (7th ed.). NY: Psychology 
Press. 

Elkind, D. (1967). Egocentrism in adolescence. Child Development, 
38, 1025-1034. 


Euling, S. Y., Herman-Giddens, M.E., Lee, P.A., Selevan, S. G., Juul, 
A., Sorensen, T. I., Dunkel, L., Himes, J.H., Teilmann, G., & Swan, 
S.H. (2008). Examination of US puberty-timing data from 1940 to 
1994 for secular trends: panel findings. Pediatrics, 121, S172-91. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2007-1813D. 

Eveleth, P. & Tanner, J. (1990). Worldwide variation in human growth 
(2nd edition). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Furman, W., & Shaffer, L. (2003). The role of romantic relationships 
in adolescent development. In P. Florsheim (Ed.), Adolescent 
romantic relations and sexual behavior: Theory, research, and 
practical implications (pp. 3–22). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Garcia, A. R., Metraux, S., Chen, C., Park, J., Culhane, D., & 
Furstenberg, F. (2018). Patterns of multisystem service use and 
school dropout among seventh-, eighth-, and ninth-grade 
students. Journal of Early Adolescence, 38(8), 1041-1073. 

Giedd, J. N. (2015). The amazing teen brain. Scientific American, 
312(6), 32-37. Goodman, G. (2006). Acne and acne scarring: The 
case for active and early intervention. Australia Family Physicians, 
35, 503- 504. 

Graber, J. A. (2013). Pubertal timing and the development of 
psychopathology in adolescence and beyond. Hormones and 
Behavior, 64, 262-289. 

Grotevant, H. (1987). Toward a process model of identity formation. 
Journal of Adolescent Research, 2, 203-222 

Harter, S. (2006). The self. In N. Eisenberg (Ed.), Handbook of child 
psychology: Vol. 3 Social, emotional, and personality development 
(6th ed., pp. 505-570). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Harter, S. (2012). Emerging self-processes during childhood and 
adolescence. In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney, (Eds.), Handbook of 
self and identity (2nd ed., pp. 680-715). New York: Guilford. 

Hihara, S., Umemura, T., & Sigimura, K. (2019). Considering the 
negatively formed identity: Relationships between negative 
identity and problematic psychosocial beliefs. Journal of 
Adolescence, 70, 24-32. 

Hudson, J. I., Hiripi, E., Pope, H. G., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). The 


prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 61(3), 
348-358. 

Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. (2017). Fatality facts: 
Teenagers 2016. Retrieved from http://www.iihs.org/iihs/
topics/t/teenagers/fatalityfacts/teenagersExternal 

Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York NY: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 

Kim-Spoon, J., Longo, G.S., & McCullough, M.E. (2012). Parent-
adolescent relationship quality as moderator for the influences 
of parents’ religiousness on adolescents’ religiousness and 
adjustment. Journal or Youth & Adolescence, 41 (12), 1576-1578. 

King’s College London. (2019). Genetic study revelas metabolic 
origins of anorexia. Retrieved from www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2019/07/190715164655.htm 

Klaczynski, P. (2001). Analytic and heuristic processing influences on 
adolescent reasoning and decision-making. Child Development, 
72 (3), 844-861. 

Klauer, S. G., Gun, F., Simons-Morton, B. G., Ouimet, M. C., Lee, S. 
E., & Dingus, T. A. (2014). Distracted driving a risk of road crashes 
among novice and experienced drivers. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 370, 54-59. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa1204142 

Kuhn, D. (2013). Reasoning. In. P.D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford 
handbook of developmental psychology. (Vol. 1, pp. 744-764). New 
York NY: Oxford University Press. 

Lee, J. C., & Staff, J. (2007). When work matters: The varying impact 
of work intensity on high school dropout. Sociology of Education, 
80(2), 158–178. 

Longest, K. C., & Shanahan, M. J. (2007). Adolescent work intensity 
and substance use: The mediational and moderational roles of 
parenting. Journal of Family and Marriage, 69(3), 703-720. 

Luciano, M., & Collins, P. F. (2012). Incentive motivation, cognitive 
control, and the adolescent brain: Is it time for a paradigm shift. 
Child Development Perspectives, 6 (4), 394-399. 

March of Dimes. (2012). Teenage pregnancy. Retrieved from 


http://www.marchofdimes.org/materials/teenage-
pregnancy.pdf 

Marcia, J. (2010). Life transitions and stress in the context of 
psychosocial development. In T.W. Miller (Ed.), Handbook of 
stressful transitions across the lifespan (Part 1, pp. 19-34). New 
York, NY: Springer Science & Business Media. 

Marsh, H. W., & Kleitman, S. (2005). Consequences of employment 
during high school: Character building, subversion of academic 
goals, or a threshold? American Educational Research Journal, 42, 
331–369. 

McAdams, D. P. (2013). Self and Identity. In R. Biswas-Diener & E. 
Diener (Eds), Noba textbook series: Psychology. Champaign, IL: 
DEF publishers. Retrieved from: nobaproject.com. 

McClintock, M. & Herdt, G. (1996). Rethinking puberty: The 
development of sexual attraction. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 5, 178-183. 

Meeus, W., Branje, S., & Overbeek, G. J. (2004). Parents and partners 
in crime: A six-year longitudinal study on changes in supportive 
relationships and delinquency in adolescence and young 
adulthood. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 45(7), 
1288-1298. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2004.00312.x 

Mendle, J., Harden, K. P., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Graber, J. A. (2010). 
Development’s tortoise and hare: Pubertal timing, pubertal 
tempo, and depressive symptoms in boys and girls. 
Developmental Psychology, 46,1341–1353. doi:10.1037/a0020205 

Mendle, J., Harden, K. P., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Graber, J. A. (2012). Peer 
relationships and depressive symptomatology in boys at puberty. 
Developmental Psychology, 48(2), 429–435. doi: 10.1037/a0026425 

Miller, B. C., Benson, B., & Galbraith, K. A. (2001). Family relationships 
and adolescent pregnancy risk: A research synthesis. 
Developmental Review, 21(1), 1-38. doi:10.1006/drev.2000.0513 

National Center for Health Statistics. (2014). Leading causes of 
death. Retrieved from: http://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/
leadcaus10_us.html 

National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (2016, May). Young 


drivers: 2014 data. (Traffic Safety Facts. Report No. DOT HS 812 
278). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration. Retrieved from: http://wwwnrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/
Pubs/812278.pdf 

National Eating Disorders Association. (2016). Health consequences 
of eating disorders. Retrieved from 
https://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/health-consequences-
eating-disorders 

National Institutes of Mental Health. (2016). Eating disorders. 
Retrieved from https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/
eating-disorders/index.shtml 

National Sleep Foundation. (2016). Teens and sleep. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/sleep topics/teens-and-sleep 

Nelson, A., & Spears Brown, C. (2019). Too pretty for homework: 
Sexualized gender stereotypes predict academic attitudes for 
gener-typical early adolescent girls. Journal of Early Adolescence, 
39(4), 603-617. 

Office of Adolescent Health. (2018). A day in the life. Retrieved from 
https://www.hhs.gov/ash/oah/facts-and-stats/day-in-thelife/
index.html 

Pew Research Center. (2015). College-educated men taking their 
time becoming dads. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/06/19/college-
educated-men-take-their-time-becoming-dads/ 

Phinney, J. S. (1989). Stages of ethnic identity development in 
minority group adolescents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 9, 34- 
49. 

Phinney, J. S. (1990). Ethnic identity in adolescents and adults: 
Review of research. Psychological Bulletin, 108(3), 499-514. 
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.108.3.499 

Phinney, J. S. (2006). Ethnic identity exploration. In J. J. Arnett & 
J. L. Tanner (Eds.) Emerging adults in America: Coming of age 
in the 21st Century. (pp. 117-134) Washington DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Rawatlal, N., Kliewer, W., & Pillay, B. J. (2015). Adolescent attachment, 


family functioning and depressive symptoms. South African 
Journal of Psychiatry, 21(3), 80-85. doi:10.7196/SAJP.8252 

Rosenbaum, J. (2006). Reborn a virgin: Adolescents’ retracting of 
virginity pledges and sexual histories. American Journal of Public 
Health, 96(6), 1098-1103. 

Ryan, A. M., Shim, S. S., & Makara, K. A. (2013). Changes in academic 
adjustment and relational self-worth across the transition to 
middle school. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 42, 1372-1384. 

Russell, S. T., Clarke, T. J., & Clary, J. (2009). Are teens “post-gay”? 
Contemporary adolescents’ sexual identity labels. Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence, 38, 884–890. 

Sadker, M. (2004). Gender equity in the classroom: The unfinished 
agenda. In M. Kimmel (Ed.), The gendered society reader, 2nd 
edition. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Schwartz, P. D., Maynard, A. M., & Uzelac, S. M. (2008). Adolescent 
egocentrism: A contemporary view. Adolescence, 43, 441- 447. 

Seifert, K. (2012). Educational psychology. Retrieved from 
http://cnx.org/content/col11302/1.2 

Shin, H., & Ryan, A. M. (2014). Early adolescent friendships and 
academic adjustment: Examining selection and influence 
processes with longitudinal social network analysis. 
Developmental Psychology, 50(11), 2462-2472. 

Shomaker, L. B., & Furman, W. (2009). Parent-adolescent 
relationship qualities, internal working models, and attachment 
styles as predictors of adolescents’ interactions with friends. 
Journal or Social and Personal Relationships, 2, 579-603. 

Sinclair, S., & Carlsson, R. (2013). What will I be when I grow up? 
The impact of gender identity threat on adolescents’ occupational 
preferences. Journal of Adolescence, 36(3), 465-474. 

Smetana, J. G. (2011). Adolescents, families, and social development. 
Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. Soller, B. (2014). Caught in a bad 
romance: Adolescent romantic relationships and mental health. 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 55(1), 56-72. 

Staff, J., Schulenberg, J. E., & Bachman, J. G. (2010). Adolescent work 


intensity, school performance, and academic engagement. 
Sociology of Education, 83, p. 183–200. 

Staff, J., Van Eseltine, M., Woolnough, A., Silver, E., & Burrington, 
L. (2011). Adolescent work experiences and family formation 
behavior. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 22(1), 150-164. 
doi:10.1111/j.1532-7795.2011.00755.x 

Steinberg, L., Icenogle, G., Shulman, E.P., et al. (2018). Around the 
world, adolescence is a time of heightened sensation seeking and 
immature self-regulation. Developmental Science, 21, e12532. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12532 

Syed, M., & Azmitia, M. (2009). Longitudinal trajectories of ethnic 
identity during the college years. Journal of Research on 
Adolescence, 19, 601-624. doi:10.1111/j.1532-7795.2009.00609.x 

Syed, M., & Juang, L. P. (2014). Ethnic identity, identity coherence, 
and psychological functioning: Testing basic assumptions of the 
developmental model. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority 
Psychology, 20(2), 176-190. doi:10.1037/a0035330 

Tartamella, L., Herscher, E., Woolston, C. (2004). Generation extra 
large: Rescuing our children from the obesity epidemic. New York: 
Basic Books. 

Taylor, J. & Gilligan, C., & Sullivan, A. (1995). Between voice and 
silence: Women and girls, race and relationship. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 

Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child development. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 

Troxel, W. M., Rodriquez, A., Seelam, R., Tucker, J. Shih, R., & 
D’Amico. (2019). Associations of longitudinal sleep trajectories 
with risky sexual behavior during late adolescence. Health 
Psychology. Retrieved from https://psycnet.apa.org/
doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Fhea0000753 

Umana-Taylor, A. (2003). Ethnic identity and self-esteem. 
Examining the roles of social context. Journal of Adolescence, 27, 
139-146. 

United States Census. (2012). 2000-2010 Intercensal estimates. 
Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/popest/data/index.html 


United States Department of Education. (2018). Trends in high 
school dropout and completion rates in the United States: 2018. 
Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2019/2019117.pdf 

United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics 
(2016). Employment projections. Retrieved from 
http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_chart_001.htm 

United States Department of Labor, Office of Disability Employment 
Policy. (2019). School based prepatory experiences. Retrieved 
from: https://www.dol.gov/odep/categories/youth/school.htm 

University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center. (2000). Acne. 
Retrieved from http://www.mednet.ucla.edu 

Vaillancourt, M. C., Paiva, A. O., Véronneau, M., & Dishion, T. (2019). 
How do individual predispositions and family dynamics 
contribute to academic adjustment through the middle school 
years? The mediating role of friends’ characteristics. Journal of 
Early Adolescence, 39(4), 576-602. 

Wade, T. D., Keski‐Rahkonen, A., & Hudson, J. I. (2011). Epidemiology 
of eating disorders. Textbook of Psychiatric Epidemiology, Third 
Edition, 343-360. 

Weintraub, K. (2016). Young and sleep deprived. Monitor on 
Psychology, 47(2), 46-50. Weir, K. (2015). Marijuana and the 
developing brain. Monitor on Psychology, 46(10), 49-52. 

Weir, K. (2016). The risks of earlier puberty. Monitor on Psychology, 
47(3), 41-44. 

Yau, J. C., & Reich, S. M. (2018). “It’s just a lot of work”: Adolescents’ 
self-presentation norms and practices on Facebook and 
Instagram. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 29(1), 196-209. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 6 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 


Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 20: Cognitive 
Development in Adolescence 

Chapter 20 Learning Objectives 

Describe Piaget’s formal operational stage and the 
characteristics of formal operational thought 
Describe adolescent egocentrism 
Describe Information Processing research on 
attention and memory 
Describe the developmental changes in language 
Describe the various types of adolescent education 
Identify changes in high school drop-out rates 
based on gender and ethnicity 


Piaget’s Formal Operational Stage During the formal operational 
stage, adolescents are able to understand abstract principles which 
have no physical reference. They can now contemplate such 
abstract constructs as beauty, love, freedom, and morality. The 
adolescent is no longer limited by what can be directly seen or 
heard. Additionally, while younger children solve problems through 
trial and error, adolescents demonstrate hypothetical-deductive 
reasoning, which is developing hypotheses based on what might 
logically occur. They are able to think about all the possibilities in 


a situation beforehand, and then test them systematically (Crain, 
2005). Now they are able to engage in true scientific thinking. 

Formal operational thinking also involves accepting hypothetical 
situations. Adolescents understand the concept of transitivity, 
which means that a relationship between two elements is carried 
over to other elements logically related to the first two, such as if 
A<B and B<C, then A<C (Thomas, 1979). For example, when asked: If 
Maria is shorter than Alicia and Alicia is shorter than Caitlyn, who is 
the shortest? Adolescents are able to answer the question correctly 
as they understand the transitivity involved. 

Does everyone reach formal operations? According to Piaget, 
most people attain some degree of formal operational thinking but 
use formal operations primarily in the areas of their strongest 
interest (Crain, 2005). In fact, most adults do not regularly 
demonstrate formal operational thought, and in small villages and 
tribal communities, it is barely used at all. A possible explanation is 
that an individual’s thinking has not been sufficiently challenged to 
demonstrate formal operational thought in all areas. 

Adolescent Egocentrism: Once adolescents can understand 
abstract thoughts, they enter a world of hypothetical possibilities 
and demonstrate egocentrism or a heightened self-focus. The 
egocentricity comes from attributing unlimited power to their own 
thoughts (Crain, 2005). Piaget believed it was not until adolescents 
took on adult roles that they would be able to learn the limits to 
their own thoughts. 

David Elkind (1967) expanded on the concept of Piaget’s 
adolescent egocentricity. Elkind theorized that the physiological 
changes that occur during adolescence result in adolescents being 
primarily concerned with themselves. Additionally, since 
adolescents fail to differentiate between what others are thinking 
and their own thoughts, they believe that others are just as 
fascinated with their behavior and appearance. This belief results 
in the adolescent anticipating the reactions of others, and 
consequently constructing an imaginary audience. “The imaginary 
audience is the adolescent’s belief that those around them are as 


concerned and focused on their appearance as they themselves 
are” (Schwartz, Maynard, & Uzelac, 2008, p. 441). Elkind thought 
that the imaginary audience contributed to the self-consciousness 
that occurs during early adolescence. The desire for privacy and 
reluctance to share personal information may be a further reaction 
to feeling under constant observation by others. Alternatively, 
recent research has indicated that the imaginary audience is not 
imaginary. Specifically, adolescents and adults feel that they are 
often under scrutiny by others, especially if they are active on social 
media (Yau & Reich, 2018). 

Another important consequence of adolescent egocentrism is the 
personal fable or belief that one is unique, special, and invulnerable 
to harm. Elkind (1967) explains that because adolescents feel so 
important to others (imaginary audience) they regard themselves 
and their feelings as being special and unique. Adolescents believe 
that only they have experienced strong and diverse emotions, and 
therefore others could never understand how they feel. This 
uniqueness in one’s emotional experiences reinforces the 
adolescent’s belief of invulnerability, especially to death. 
Adolescents will engage in risky behaviors, such as drinking and 
driving or unprotected sex, and feel they will not suffer any negative 
consequences. Elkind believed that adolescent egocentricity 
emerged in early adolescence and declined in middle adolescence, 
however, recent research has also identified egocentricity in late 
adolescence (Schwartz, et al., 2008). 

Consequences of Formal Operational Thought: As adolescents 
are now able to think abstractly and hypothetically, they exhibit 
many new ways of reflecting on information (Dolgin, 2011). For 
example, they demonstrate greater introspection or thinking about 
one’s thoughts and feelings. They begin to imagine how the world 
could be which leads them to become idealistic or insisting upon 
high standards of behavior. Because of their idealism, they may 
become critical of others, especially adults in their life. Additionally, 
adolescents can demonstrate hypocrisy, or pretend to be what they 
are not. Since they are able to recognize what others expect of 


them, they will conform to those expectations for their emotions 
and behavior seemingly hypocritical to themselves. Lastly, 
adolescents can exhibit pseudostupidity. This is when they 
approach problems at a level that is too complex, and they fail 
because the tasks are too simple. Their new ability to consider 
alternatives is not completely under control and they appear 
“stupid” when they are in fact bright, just not experienced. 

Information Processing 

Cognitive Control: As noted in earlier chapters, executive functions, 
such as attention, increases in working memory, and cognitive 
flexibility have been steadily improving since early childhood. 
Studies have found that executive function is very competent in 
adolescence. However, self-regulation, or the ability to control 
impulses, may still fail. A failure in self-regulation is especially true 
when there is high stress or high demand on mental functions 
(Luciano & Collins, 2012). While high stress or demand may tax 
even an adult’s self-regulatory abilities, neurological changes in the 
adolescent brain may make teens particularly prone to more risky 
decision making under these conditions. 

Inductive and Deductive Reasoning: Inductive reasoning 
emerges in childhood and occurs when specific observations, or 
specific comments from those in authority, may be used to draw 
general conclusions. This is sometimes referred to as “bottom-up-
processing”. However, in inductive reasoning, the veracity of the 
information that created the general conclusion does not guarantee 
the accuracy of that conclusion. For instance, a child who has only 
observed thunder on summer days may conclude that it only 
thunders in the summer. In contrast, deductive reasoning emerges 
in adolescence and refers to reasoning that starts with some 
overarching principle and based on this proposes specific 
conclusions. This is sometimes referred to as “top-down-


processing”. Deductive reasoning guarantees a truthful conclusion if 
the premises on which it is based are accurate. 

Figure 6.12 

Intuitive versus Analytic Thinking: Cognitive psychologists often 
refer to intuitive and analytic thought as the Dual-Process Model; 
the notion that humans have two distinct networks for processing 
information (Albert & Steinberg, 2011). Intuitive thought is 
automatic, unconscious, and fast (Kahneman, 2011), and it is more 
experiential and emotional. In contrast, analytic thought is 
deliberate, conscious, and rational. While these systems interact, 
they are distinct (Kuhn, 2013). Intuitive thought is easier and more 
commonly used in everyday life. It is also more commonly used by 
children and teens than by adults (Klaczynski, 2001). The quickness 
of adolescent thought, along with the maturation of the limbic 
system, may make teens more prone to emotional intuitive thinking 
than adults. 


Education 

In early adolescence, the transition from elementary school to 
middle school can be difficult for many students, both academically 
and socially. Crosnoe and Benner (2015) found that some students 
became disengaged and alienated during this transition which 
resulted in negative longterm consequences in academic 
performance and mental health. This may be because middle school 
teachers are seen as less supportive than elementary school 
teachers (Brass, McKellar, North, & Ryan, 2019). Similarly, the 
transition to high school can be difficult. For example, high schools 
are larger, more bureaucratic, less personal, and there are less 
opportunities for teachers to get to know their students (Eccles & 
Roeser, 2016). 

Peers: Certainly, the beliefs and expectations about academic 
success supported by an adolescent’s family play a significant role 
in the student’s achievement and school engagement. However, 
research has also focused on the importance of peers in an 
adolescent’s school experience. Specifically, having friends who are 
high-achieving, academically motivated and engaged promotes 
motivation and engagement in the adolescent, while those whose 
friends are unmotivated, disengaged, and low achieving promotes 
the same feelings (Shin & Ryan, 2014; Vaillancourt, Paiva, Véronneau, 
& Dishion, 2019). 

Gender: Crosnoe and Benner (2015) found that female students 
earn better grades, try harder, and are more intrinsically motivated 
than male students. Further, Duchesne, Larose, and Feng (2019) 
described how female students were more oriented toward skill 
mastery, used a variety of learning strategies, and persevered more 
than males. However, more females exhibit worries and anxiety 
about school, including feeling that they must please teachers and 
parents. These worries can heighten their effort but lead to fears 
of disappointing others. In contrast, males are more confident and 
do not value adult feedback regarding their academic performance 


(Brass et al., 2019). There is a subset of female students who identify 
with sexualized gender stereotypes (SGS), however, and they tend 
to underperform academically. These female students endorse the 
beliefs that “girls” should be sexy and not smart. Nelson and Brown 
(2019) found that female students who support SGS, reported less 
desire to master skills and concepts, were more skeptical of the 
usefulness of an education, and downplayed their intelligence. 

Life of a high school student: On average, high school teens 
spend approximately 7 hours each weekday and 1.1 hours each day 
on the weekend on educational activities. This includes attending 
classes, participating in extracurricular activities (excluding sports), 
and doing homework (Office of Adolescent Health, 2018). High 
school males and females spend about the same amount of time in 
class, doing homework, eating and drinking, and working. However, 
they do spend their time outside of these activities in different ways. 

High school males. On average, high school males spend about 
one more hour per day on media and communications 
activities than females on both weekdays (2.9 vs. 1.8 hours) and 
weekend days (4.8 vs. 3.8 hours). They also spend more time 
playing sports on both weekdays (0.9 vs. 0.5 hours) and 
weekend days (1.2 vs. 0.5 hours). On weekdays, high school 
males get an hour more sleep than females (9.2 vs. 8.2 hours, 
on average). 
High school females. On an average weekday, high school 
females spend more time than boys on both leisure activities 
(1.7 vs. 1.1 hours) and religious activities (0.1 vs. 0.0 hours). High 
school females also spend more time on grooming on both 
weekdays and weekend days (1.1 vs. 0.7 hours, on average for 
both weekdays and weekend days). 


High School Dropouts: The status dropout rate refers to the 
percentage of 16 to 24 year-olds who are not enrolled in school 
and do not have high school credentials (either a diploma or an 
equivalency credential such as a General Educational Development 


[GED] certificate). The dropout rate is based on sample surveys 
of the civilian, noninstitutionalized population, which excludes 
persons in prisons, persons in the military, and other persons not 
living in households. The dropout rate among high school students 
has declined from a rate of 12% in 1990, to 6.1% in 2016 (U.S. 
Department of Education, 2018). The rate is lower for Whites than 
for Blacks, and the rates for both Whites and Blacks are lower than 
the rate for Hispanics. However, the gap between Whites, Blacks, 
and Hispanics have narrowed (see Figure 6.13). 

Figure 6.13 

The dropout rate for males in 1990 was 12%, where it stayed until 
2000. Thereafter the rate has dropped to 7.1% in 2016. The dropout 
rate for females in 1990 was 12%, and it has dropped to 5.1% in 2016 
(U.S. Department of Education, 2018). 

Reasons for Dropping Out of School: Garcia et al. (2018) reviewed 
the research on why students dropped out of school and identified 
several major obstacles to school completion. These included: 
Adolescents who resided in foster care or were part of the juvenile 


justice system. In fact, being confined in a juvenile detention facility 
practically guaranteed that a student would not complete school. 
Having a physical or mental health condition, or the need for special 
educational services, adversely affected school completion. Being 
maltreated due to abuse or neglect and/or being homeless also 
contributed to dropping out of school. Additonally, adolescent-
specific factors, including race, ethnicity and age, as well as family-
specific characteristics, such as poverty, single parenting, large 
family size, and stressful transitions, all contributed to an increased 
likelihood of dropping-out of school. Lastly, community factors, 
such as unsafe neighborhoods, gang activity, and a lack of social 
services increased the number of school dropouts. 

School Based Preparatory Experiences 

According to the U. S. Department of Labor (2019), to perform at 
optimal levels in all education settings, all youth need to participate 
in educational programs grounded in standards, clear performance 
expectations and graduation exit options based upon meaningful, 
accurate, and relevant indicators of student learning and skills. 
These should include: 

Academic programs that are based on clear state standards 
Career and technical education programs that are based on 
professional and industry standards 
Curricular and program options based on universal design of 
school, work and communitybased learning experiences 
Learning environments that are small and safe, including extra 
supports such as tutoring, as necessary 
Supports from and by highly qualified staff 
Access to an assessment system that includes multiple 
measures, and 
Graduation standards that include options. 



Teenagers and Working 

Many adolescents work either summer jobs or during the school 
year. Holding a job may offer teenagers extra funds, the opportunity 
to learn new skills, ideas about future careers, and perhaps the 
true value of money. However, there are numerous concerns about 
teenagers working, especially during the school year. A long-
standing concern is that that it “engenders precocious maturity of 
more adult-like roles and problem behaviors” (Staff, VanEseltine, 
Woolnough, Silver, & Burrington, 2011, p. 150). 

Several studies have found that working more than 20 hours per 
week can lead to declines in grades, a general disengagement from 
school (Staff, Schulenberg, & Bachman, 2010; Lee & Staff, 2007; 
Marsh & Kleitman, 2005), an increase in substance abuse (Longest & 
Shanahan, 2007), engaging in earlier sexual behavior, and pregnancy 
(Staff et al., 2011). However, like many employee groups, teens have 
seen a drop in the number of jobs. The summer jobs of previous 
generations have been on a steady decline, according to the United 
States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016). See 
Figure 6.15 for recent trends. 

Figure 6.15 


Teenage Drivers Driving gives teens a sense of freedom and 
independence from their parents. It can also free up time for 
parents as they are not shuttling teens to and from school, activities, 
or work. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
(NHTSA) reports that in 2014 young drivers (15 to 20 year-olds) 
accounted for 5.5% (11.7 million) of the total number of drivers (214 
million) in the US (National Center for Statistics and Analysis 
(NCSA), 2016). 

However, almost 9% of all drivers involved in fatal crashes that 
year were young drivers (NCSA, 2016), and according to the National 
Center for Health Statistics (2014), motor vehicle accidents are the 
leading cause of death for 15 to 20 year-olds. “In all motorized 
jurisdictions around the world, young, inexperienced drivers have 
much higher crash rates than older, more experienced drivers” 
(NCSA, 2016, p. 1). A teen’s risk of an accident is especially high 
during the first months of receiving a license (CDC, 2018a). The rate 
of fatal crashes is twice as high for young males as for young females 
(CDC, 2018a), although for both genders the rate was highest for 
the 15-20 years-old age group. For young males, the rate for fatal 
crashes was approximately 46 per 100,000 drivers, compared to 20 
per 100,000 drivers for young females. The NHTSA (NCSA, 2016) 


only 59% of teens reported that they always wore a seat belt when 
riding as a passenger (CDC, 2018b). Crash data shows that almost 
half of teenage passengers who die in a car crash were not wearing 
a seat belt (Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, 2017). 
reported that of the young drivers who were killed and who had 
alcohol in their system, 81% had a blood alcohol count past what 
was considered the legal limit. Fatal crashes involving alcohol use 
were higher among young men than young women. The NHTSA 
also found that teens were less likely to use seat belt restraints if 
they were driving under the influence of alcohol, and that restraint 
use decreased as the level of alcohol intoxication increased. Overall, 
teens have the lowest rate of seat belt use. In a 2017 CDC survey, 

In a AAA study of non-fatal, but moderate to severe motor vehicle 
accidents in 2014, more than half involved young male drivers 16 to 
19 years of age (Carney, McGehee, Harland, Weiss, & Raby, 2015). 
In 36% of rear-end collisions, teen drivers were following cars too 
closely to be able to stop in time, and in single-vehicle accidents, 
driving too fast for weather and road conditions was a factor in 79% 
of crashes involving teens. Distraction was also a factor in nearly 
60% of the accidents involving teen drivers. Fellow passengers, 
often also teenagers (84% of the time), and cell phones were the top 
two sources of distraction, respectively. This data suggested that 
having another teenager in the car increased the risk of an accident 
by 44% (Carney et al., 2015). According to the NHTSA, 10% of drivers 


aged 15 to 19 years involved in fatal crashes were reported to be 
distracted at the time of the crash; the highest figure for any age 
group (NCSA, 2016). Distraction coupled with inexperience has been 
found to greatly increase the risk of an accident (Klauer et al., 2014). 
Finally, despite all the public service announcements warning of the 
dangers of texting while driving, four out of ten teens report having 
engaged in this within the past 12 months (CDC, 2018b). 

The NHTSA did find that the number of accidents has been on 
a decline since 2005. They attribute this to greater driver training, 
more social awareness to the challenges of driving for teenagers, 
and to changes in laws restricting the drinking age. The NHTSA 
estimates that the raising of the legal drinking age to 21 in all 50 
states and the District of Columbia has saved 30,323 lives since 1975. 
The CDC also credits graduated driver licenses (GDL) for reducing 
the number of accidents. While GDL programs vary widely, a 
comprehensive program has a long practice period, requires greater 
parental participation, and limits newly licensed drivers from 
driving under certain high-risk conditions (CDC, 2018a). 

References 

Albert, D., & Steinberg, L. (2011). Adolescent judgment and decision 
making. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21, 211– 224. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (Fifth Edition). Washington, D. C.: 
Author. 

Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales, J., & Nielsen, S. (2011). Mortality 
rates in patients with anorexia nervosa and other eating 
disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(7), 724-731. 

Birkeland, M. S., Melkivik, O., Holsen, I., & Wold, B. (2012). 
Trajectories of global self-esteem during adolescence. Journal of 
Adolescence, 35, 43-54. 


Bosson, J. K., Vandello, J., & Buckner, C. (2019). The psychology of sex 
and gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Brass, N., McKellar, North, E., & Ryan, A. (2019). Early adolescents’ 
adjustment at school: A fresh look at grade and gender 
differences. Journal of Early Adolescence, 39(5), 689-716. 

Brown, B. B., & Larson, J. (2009). Peer relationships in adolescence. 
In R. M. Lerner & L. Steinberg (Eds.), Handbook of adolescent 
psychology (pp. 74–103). New York, NY: Wiley. 

Carney, C., McGehee, D., Harland, K., Weiss, M., & Raby, M. (2015, 
March). Using naturalistic driving data to assess the prevalence of 
environmental factors and driver behaviors in teen driver crashes. 
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety. Retrieved from 
https://www.aaafoundation.org/sites/default/files/
2015TeenCrashCausationReport.pdf 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Caspi, A., Lynam, D., Moffitt, T. E., & Silva, P. A. (1993). Unraveling 
girls’ delinquency: Biological, dispositional, and contextual 
contributions to adolescent misbehavior. Developmental 
Psychology, 29(1), 19-30. 

Center for Disease Control. (2004). Trends in the prevalence of 
sexual behaviors, 1991-2003. Bethesda, MD: Author. 

Center for Disease Control. (2016). Birth rates (live births) per 1,000 
females aged 15–19 years, by race and Hispanic ethnicity, select 
years. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/teenpregnancy/
about/birth-rates-chart-2000-2011-text.htm 

Centers for Disease Control. (2018a). Teen drivers: Get the facts. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/motorvehiclesafety/
teen_drivers/teendrivers_factsheet.html 

Centers for Disease Control. (2018b). Trends in the behaviors that 
contribute to unintentional injury: National Youth Risk Behavioral 
Survey. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/
data/yrbs/pdf/trends/
2017_unintentional_injury_trend_yrbs.pdf 

Chein, J., Albert, D., O’Brien, L., Uckert, K., & Steinberg, L. (2011). 


Peers increase adolescent risk taking by enhancing activity in the 
brain’s reward circuitry. Developmental Science, 14(2), F1-F10. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01035.x 

Chen, B., Vansteenkiste, M., Beyers, W., Soensens, B., & Van 
Petegem, S. (2013). Autonomy in family decision making for 
Chinese adolescents: Disentangling the dual meaning of 
autonomy. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 44, 1184- 1209. 

Connolly, J., Craig, W., Goldberg, A., & Pepler, D. (2004). Mixed-
gender groups, dating, and romantic relationships in early 
adolescence. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 14, 185-207. 

Connolly, J., Furman, W., & Konarski, R. (2000). The role of peers 
in the emergence of heterosexual romantic relationships in 
adolescence. Child Development, 71, 1395–1408. 

Costigan, C. L., Cauce, A. M., & Etchinson, K. (2007). Changes in 
African American mother-daughter relationships during 
adolescence: Conflict, autonomy, and warmth. In B. J. R. 
Leadbeater & N. Way (Eds.), Urban girls revisited: Building 
strengths (pp. 177-201). New York NY: New York University Press. 

Côtè, J. E. (2006). Emerging adulthood as an institutionalized 
moratorium: Risks and benefits to identity formation. In J. J. 
Arnett & J. T. Tanner (Eds.), Emerging adults in America: Coming 
of age in the 21st century, (pp. 85-116). Washington D.C.: American 
Psychological Association Press. 

Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development concepts and 
applications (5th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson. 

Crooks, K. L., & Baur, K. (2007). Our sexuality (10th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth. 

Crosnoe, R., & Benner, A. D. (2015). Children at school. In M. H. 
Bornstein, T. Leventhal, & R. M. Lerner (Eds.). Handbook of child 
psychology and developmental science: Ecological settings and 
processes (pp. 268-304). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 

De Wit, D. J., Karioja, K., Rye, B. J., & Shain, M. (2011). Perceptions of 
declining classmate and teacher support following the transition 
to high school: Potential correlates of increasing student mental 
health difficulties. Psychology in the Schools, 48, 556-572. 


Dishion, T. J., & Tipsord, J. M. (2011). Peer contagion in child and 
adolescent social and emotional development. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 62, 189–214. 

Dobbs, D. (2012). Beautiful brains. National Geographic, 220(4), 36. 
Dolgin, K. G. (2011). The adolescent: Development, relationships, 
and culture (13th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson. 

Duchesne, S., Larose, S., & Feng, B. (2019). Achievement goals and 
engagement with academic work in early high school: Does 
seeking help from teachers matter? Journal of Early Adolescence, 
39(2), 222-252. 

Dudovitz, R.N., Chung, P.J., Elliott, M.N., Davies, S.L., Tortolero, S,… 
Baumler, E. (2015). Relationship of age for grade and pubertal 
stage to early initiation of substance use. Preventing Chronic 
Disease, 12, 150234. doi:10.5888/pcd12.150234. 

Eccles, J. S., & Rosner, R. W. (2015). School and community 
influences on human development. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E. 
Lamb (Eds.), Developmental science (7th ed.). NY: Psychology 
Press. 

Elkind, D. (1967). Egocentrism in adolescence. Child Development, 
38, 1025-1034. 

Euling, S. Y., Herman-Giddens, M.E., Lee, P.A., Selevan, S. G., Juul, 
A., Sorensen, T. I., Dunkel, L., Himes, J.H., Teilmann, G., & Swan, 
S.H. (2008). Examination of US puberty-timing data from 1940 to 
1994 for secular trends: panel findings. Pediatrics, 121, S172-91. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2007-1813D. 

Eveleth, P. & Tanner, J. (1990). Worldwide variation in human growth 
(2nd edition). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Furman, W., & Shaffer, L. (2003). The role of romantic relationships 
in adolescent development. In P. Florsheim (Ed.), Adolescent 
romantic relations and sexual behavior: Theory, research, and 
practical implications (pp. 3–22). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Garcia, A. R., Metraux, S., Chen, C., Park, J., Culhane, D., & 
Furstenberg, F. (2018). Patterns of multisystem service use and 
school dropout among seventh-, eighth-, and ninth-grade 
students. Journal of Early Adolescence, 38(8), 1041-1073. 


Giedd, J. N. (2015). The amazing teen brain. Scientific American, 
312(6), 32-37. Goodman, G. (2006). Acne and acne scarring: The 
case for active and early intervention. Australia Family Physicians, 
35, 503- 504. 

Graber, J. A. (2013). Pubertal timing and the development of 
psychopathology in adolescence and beyond. Hormones and 
Behavior, 64, 262-289. 

Grotevant, H. (1987). Toward a process model of identity formation. 
Journal of Adolescent Research, 2, 203-222 

Harter, S. (2006). The self. In N. Eisenberg (Ed.), Handbook of child 
psychology: Vol. 3 Social, emotional, and personality development 
(6th ed., pp. 505-570). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Harter, S. (2012). Emerging self-processes during childhood and 
adolescence. In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney, (Eds.), Handbook of 
self and identity (2nd ed., pp. 680-715). New York: Guilford. 

Hihara, S., Umemura, T., & Sigimura, K. (2019). Considering the 
negatively formed identity: Relationships between negative 
identity and problematic psychosocial beliefs. Journal of 
Adolescence, 70, 24-32. 

Hudson, J. I., Hiripi, E., Pope, H. G., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). The 
prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 61(3), 
348-358. 

Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. (2017). Fatality facts: 
Teenagers 2016. Retrieved from http://www.iihs.org/iihs/
topics/t/teenagers/fatalityfacts/teenagersExternal 

Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York NY: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 

Kim-Spoon, J., Longo, G.S., & McCullough, M.E. (2012). Parent-
adolescent relationship quality as moderator for the influences 
of parents’ religiousness on adolescents’ religiousness and 
adjustment. Journal or Youth & Adolescence, 41 (12), 1576-1578. 

King’s College London. (2019). Genetic study revelas metabolic 
origins of anorexia. Retrieved from www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2019/07/190715164655.htm 


Klaczynski, P. (2001). Analytic and heuristic processing influences on 
adolescent reasoning and decision-making. Child Development, 
72 (3), 844-861. 

Klauer, S. G., Gun, F., Simons-Morton, B. G., Ouimet, M. C., Lee, S. 
E., & Dingus, T. A. (2014). Distracted driving a risk of road crashes 
among novice and experienced drivers. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 370, 54-59. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa1204142 

Kuhn, D. (2013). Reasoning. In. P.D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford 
handbook of developmental psychology. (Vol. 1, pp. 744-764). New 
York NY: Oxford University Press. 

Lee, J. C., & Staff, J. (2007). When work matters: The varying impact 
of work intensity on high school dropout. Sociology of Education, 
80(2), 158–178. 

Longest, K. C., & Shanahan, M. J. (2007). Adolescent work intensity 
and substance use: The mediational and moderational roles of 
parenting. Journal of Family and Marriage, 69(3), 703-720. 

Luciano, M., & Collins, P. F. (2012). Incentive motivation, cognitive 
control, and the adolescent brain: Is it time for a paradigm shift. 
Child Development Perspectives, 6 (4), 394-399. 

March of Dimes. (2012). Teenage pregnancy. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/materials/teenage-
pregnancy.pdf 

Marcia, J. (2010). Life transitions and stress in the context of 
psychosocial development. In T.W. Miller (Ed.), Handbook of 
stressful transitions across the lifespan (Part 1, pp. 19-34). New 
York, NY: Springer Science & Business Media. 

Marsh, H. W., & Kleitman, S. (2005). Consequences of employment 
during high school: Character building, subversion of academic 
goals, or a threshold? American Educational Research Journal, 42, 
331–369. 

McAdams, D. P. (2013). Self and Identity. In R. Biswas-Diener & E. 
Diener (Eds), Noba textbook series: Psychology. Champaign, IL: 
DEF publishers. Retrieved from: nobaproject.com. 

McClintock, M. & Herdt, G. (1996). Rethinking puberty: The 


development of sexual attraction. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 5, 178-183. 

Meeus, W., Branje, S., & Overbeek, G. J. (2004). Parents and partners 
in crime: A six-year longitudinal study on changes in supportive 
relationships and delinquency in adolescence and young 
adulthood. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 45(7), 
1288-1298. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2004.00312.x 

Mendle, J., Harden, K. P., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Graber, J. A. (2010). 
Development’s tortoise and hare: Pubertal timing, pubertal 
tempo, and depressive symptoms in boys and girls. 
Developmental Psychology, 46,1341–1353. doi:10.1037/a0020205 

Mendle, J., Harden, K. P., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Graber, J. A. (2012). Peer 
relationships and depressive symptomatology in boys at puberty. 
Developmental Psychology, 48(2), 429–435. doi: 10.1037/a0026425 

Miller, B. C., Benson, B., & Galbraith, K. A. (2001). Family relationships 
and adolescent pregnancy risk: A research synthesis. 
Developmental Review, 21(1), 1-38. doi:10.1006/drev.2000.0513 

National Center for Health Statistics. (2014). Leading causes of 
death. Retrieved from: http://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/
leadcaus10_us.html 

National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (2016, May). Young 
drivers: 2014 data. (Traffic Safety Facts. Report No. DOT HS 812 
278). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration. Retrieved from: http://wwwnrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/
Pubs/812278.pdf 

National Eating Disorders Association. (2016). Health consequences 
of eating disorders. Retrieved from 
https://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/health-consequences-
eating-disorders 

National Institutes of Mental Health. (2016). Eating disorders. 
Retrieved from https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/
eating-disorders/index.shtml 

National Sleep Foundation. (2016). Teens and sleep. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/sleep topics/teens-and-sleep 

Nelson, A., & Spears Brown, C. (2019). Too pretty for homework: 


Sexualized gender stereotypes predict academic attitudes for 
gener-typical early adolescent girls. Journal of Early Adolescence, 
39(4), 603-617. 

Office of Adolescent Health. (2018). A day in the life. Retrieved from 
https://www.hhs.gov/ash/oah/facts-and-stats/day-in-thelife/
index.html 

Pew Research Center. (2015). College-educated men taking their 
time becoming dads. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/06/19/college-
educated-men-take-their-time-becoming-dads/ 

Phinney, J. S. (1989). Stages of ethnic identity development in 
minority group adolescents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 9, 34- 
49. 

Phinney, J. S. (1990). Ethnic identity in adolescents and adults: 
Review of research. Psychological Bulletin, 108(3), 499-514. 
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.108.3.499 

Phinney, J. S. (2006). Ethnic identity exploration. In J. J. Arnett & 
J. L. Tanner (Eds.) Emerging adults in America: Coming of age 
in the 21st Century. (pp. 117-134) Washington DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Rawatlal, N., Kliewer, W., & Pillay, B. J. (2015). Adolescent attachment, 
family functioning and depressive symptoms. South African 
Journal of Psychiatry, 21(3), 80-85. doi:10.7196/SAJP.8252 

Rosenbaum, J. (2006). Reborn a virgin: Adolescents’ retracting of 
virginity pledges and sexual histories. American Journal of Public 
Health, 96(6), 1098-1103. 

Ryan, A. M., Shim, S. S., & Makara, K. A. (2013). Changes in academic 
adjustment and relational self-worth across the transition to 
middle school. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 42, 1372-1384. 

Russell, S. T., Clarke, T. J., & Clary, J. (2009). Are teens “post-gay”? 
Contemporary adolescents’ sexual identity labels. Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence, 38, 884–890. 

Sadker, M. (2004). Gender equity in the classroom: The unfinished 
agenda. In M. Kimmel (Ed.), The gendered society reader, 2nd 
edition. New York: Oxford University Press. 


Schwartz, P. D., Maynard, A. M., & Uzelac, S. M. (2008). Adolescent 
egocentrism: A contemporary view. Adolescence, 43, 441- 447. 

Seifert, K. (2012). Educational psychology. Retrieved from 
http://cnx.org/content/col11302/1.2 

Shin, H., & Ryan, A. M. (2014). Early adolescent friendships and 
academic adjustment: Examining selection and influence 
processes with longitudinal social network analysis. 
Developmental Psychology, 50(11), 2462-2472. 

Shomaker, L. B., & Furman, W. (2009). Parent-adolescent 
relationship qualities, internal working models, and attachment 
styles as predictors of adolescents’ interactions with friends. 
Journal or Social and Personal Relationships, 2, 579-603. 

Sinclair, S., & Carlsson, R. (2013). What will I be when I grow up? 
The impact of gender identity threat on adolescents’ occupational 
preferences. Journal of Adolescence, 36(3), 465-474. 

Smetana, J. G. (2011). Adolescents, families, and social development. 
Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. Soller, B. (2014). Caught in a bad 
romance: Adolescent romantic relationships and mental health. 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 55(1), 56-72. 

Staff, J., Schulenberg, J. E., & Bachman, J. G. (2010). Adolescent work 
intensity, school performance, and academic engagement. 
Sociology of Education, 83, p. 183–200. 

Staff, J., Van Eseltine, M., Woolnough, A., Silver, E., & Burrington, 
L. (2011). Adolescent work experiences and family formation 
behavior. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 22(1), 150-164. 
doi:10.1111/j.1532-7795.2011.00755.x 

Steinberg, L., Icenogle, G., Shulman, E.P., et al. (2018). Around the 
world, adolescence is a time of heightened sensation seeking and 
immature self-regulation. Developmental Science, 21, e12532. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12532 

Syed, M., & Azmitia, M. (2009). Longitudinal trajectories of ethnic 
identity during the college years. Journal of Research on 
Adolescence, 19, 601-624. doi:10.1111/j.1532-7795.2009.00609.x 

Syed, M., & Juang, L. P. (2014). Ethnic identity, identity coherence, 
and psychological functioning: Testing basic assumptions of the 


developmental model. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority 
Psychology, 20(2), 176-190. doi:10.1037/a0035330 

Tartamella, L., Herscher, E., Woolston, C. (2004). Generation extra 
large: Rescuing our children from the obesity epidemic. New York: 
Basic Books. 

Taylor, J. & Gilligan, C., & Sullivan, A. (1995). Between voice and 
silence: Women and girls, race and relationship. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 

Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child development. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 

Troxel, W. M., Rodriquez, A., Seelam, R., Tucker, J. Shih, R., & 
D’Amico. (2019). Associations of longitudinal sleep trajectories 
with risky sexual behavior during late adolescence. Health 
Psychology. Retrieved from https://psycnet.apa.org/
doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Fhea0000753 

Umana-Taylor, A. (2003). Ethnic identity and self-esteem. 
Examining the roles of social context. Journal of Adolescence, 27, 
139-146. 

United States Census. (2012). 2000-2010 Intercensal estimates. 
Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/popest/data/index.html 

United States Department of Education. (2018). Trends in high 
school dropout and completion rates in the United States: 2018. 
Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2019/2019117.pdf 

United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics 
(2016). Employment projections. Retrieved from 
http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_chart_001.htm 

United States Department of Labor, Office of Disability Employment 
Policy. (2019). School based prepatory experiences. Retrieved 
from: https://www.dol.gov/odep/categories/youth/school.htm 

University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center. (2000). Acne. 
Retrieved from http://www.mednet.ucla.edu 

Vaillancourt, M. C., Paiva, A. O., Véronneau, M., & Dishion, T. (2019). 
How do individual predispositions and family dynamics 
contribute to academic adjustment through the middle school 


years? The mediating role of friends’ characteristics. Journal of 
Early Adolescence, 39(4), 576-602. 

Wade, T. D., Keski‐Rahkonen, A., & Hudson, J. I. (2011). Epidemiology 
of eating disorders. Textbook of Psychiatric Epidemiology, Third 
Edition, 343-360. 

Weintraub, K. (2016). Young and sleep deprived. Monitor on 
Psychology, 47(2), 46-50. Weir, K. (2015). Marijuana and the 
developing brain. Monitor on Psychology, 46(10), 49-52. 

Weir, K. (2016). The risks of earlier puberty. Monitor on Psychology, 
47(3), 41-44. 

Yau, J. C., & Reich, S. M. (2018). “It’s just a lot of work”: Adolescents’ 
self-presentation norms and practices on Facebook and 
Instagram. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 29(1), 196-209. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 6 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 21: Psychosocial 
Development in Adolescence 

Chapter 21 Learning Objectives 

Describe the changes in self-concept and self-
esteem in adolescence 
Summarize Erikson’s fifth psychosocial task of 
identity versus role confusion 
Describe Marcia’s four identity statuses 
Summarize the three stages of ethnic identity 
development 
Describe the parent-teen relationship 
Describe the role of peers 
Describe dating relationships 


Self-concept and Self-esteem in Adolescence 

In adolescence, teens continue to develop their self-concept. Their 
ability to think of the possibilities and to reason more abstractly may 
explain the further differentiation of the self during adolescence. 
However, the teen’s understanding of self is often full of 
contradictions. Young teens may see themselves as outgoing but 


also withdrawn, happy yet often moody, and both smart and 
completely clueless (Harter, 2012). These contradictions, along with 
the teen’s growing recognition that their personality and behavior 
seem to change depending on who they are with or where they 
are, can lead the young teen to feel like a fraud. With their parents 
they may seem angrier and sullen, with their friends they are more 
outgoing and goofier, and at work they are quiet and cautious. 
“Which one is really me?” may be the refrain of the young teenager. 
Harter (2012) found that adolescents emphasize traits such as being 
friendly and considerate more than do children, highlighting their 
increasing concern about how others may see them. Harter also 
found that older teens add values and moral standards to their self-
descriptions. 

As self-concept differentiates, so too does self-esteem. In 
addition to the academic, social, appearance, and physical/athletic 
dimensions of self-esteem in middle and late childhood, teens also 
add perceptions of their competency in romantic relationships, on 
the job, and in close friendships (Harter, 2006). Self-esteem often 
drops when children transition from one school setting to another, 
such as shifting from elementary to middle school, or junior high to 
high school (Ryan, Shim, & Makara, 2013). These drops are usually 
temporary, unless there are additional stressors such as parental 
conflict, or other family disruptions (De Wit, Karioja, Rye, & Shain, 
2011). Self-esteem rises from mid to late adolescence for most 
teenagers, especially if they feel competent in their peer 
relationships, their appearance, and athletic abilities (Birkeland, 
Melkivik, Holsen, & Wold, 2012). 

Erikson: Identity vs. Role Confusion 

Erikson believed that the primary psychosocial task of adolescence 
was establishing an identity. Teens struggle with the question “Who 
am I?” This includes questions regarding their appearance, 


vocational choices and career aspirations, education, relationships, 
sexuality, political and social views, personality, and interests. 
Erikson saw this as a period of confusion and experimentation 
regarding identity and one’s life path. During adolescence we 
experience psychological moratorium, where teens put on hold 
commitment to an identity while exploring the options. The 
culmination of this exploration is a more coherent view of oneself. 
Those who are unsuccessful at resolving this stage may either 
withdraw further into social isolation or become lost in the crowd. 
However, more recent research, suggests that few leave this age 
period with identity achievement, and that most identity formation 
occurs during young adulthood (Côtè, 2006). 

Expanding on Erikson’s theory, James Marcia (2010) identified four 
identity statuses that represent the four possible combinations of 
the dimension of commitment and exploration (see Table 6.2). 

Table 6.2 

The least mature status, and one common in many children, is 
identity diffusion. Identity diffusion is a status that characterizes 
those who have neither explored the options, nor made a 
commitment to an identity. Those who persist in this identity may 
drift aimlessly with little connection to those around them or have 
little sense of purpose in life. 

Those in identity foreclosure have made a commitment to an 
identity without having explored the options. Some parents may 
make these decisions for their children and do not grant the teen 
the opportunity to make choices. In other instances, teens may 


strongly identify with parents and others in their life and wish to 
follow in their footsteps. 

Identity moratorium is a status that describes those who are 
activity exploring in an attempt to establish an identity but have 
yet to have made any commitment. This can be an anxious and 
emotionally tense time period as the adolescent experiments with 
different roles and explores various beliefs. Nothing is certain and 
there are many questions, but few answers. 

Identity achievement refers to those who after exploration have 
made a commitment. This is a long process and is not often 
achieved by the end of adolescence. 

During high school and the college years, teens and young adults 
move from identity diffusion and foreclosure toward moratorium 
and achievement. The biggest gains in the development of identity 
are in college, as college students are exposed to a greater variety 
of career choices, lifestyles, and beliefs. This is likely to spur on 
questions regarding identity. A great deal of the identity work we do 
in adolescence and young adulthood is about values and goals, as we 
strive to articulate a personal vision or dream for what we hope to 
accomplish in the future (McAdams, 2013). 


Developmental psychologists have researched several different 
areas of identity development and some of the main areas include: 

Religious identity: The religious views of teens are often similar 
to that of their families (KimSpoon, Longo, & McCullough, 2012). 
Most teens may question specific customs, practices, or ideas in the 
faith of their parents, but few completely reject the religion of their 
families. 

Political identity: The political ideology of teens is also influenced 
by their parents’ political beliefs. A new trend in the 21st century is a 
decrease in party affiliation among adults. Many adults do not align 
themselves with either the democratic or republican party but view 
themselves as more of an “independent”. Their teenage children are 
often following suit or become more apolitical (Côtè, 2006). 

Vocational identity: While adolescents in earlier generations 


envisioned themselves as working in a particular job, and often 
worked as an apprentice or part-time in such occupations as 
teenagers, this is rarely the case today. Vocational identity takes 
longer to develop, as most of today’s occupations require specific 
skills and knowledge that will require additional education or are 
acquired on the job itself. In addition, many of the jobs held by teens 
are not in occupations that most teens will seek as adults. 

Gender identity: Acquiring a gender identity is becoming an 
increasingly prolonged task as attitudes and norms regarding 
gender keep changing. The roles appropriate for males and females 
are evolving, and the lack of a gender binary allow adolescents 
more freedom to explore various aspects of gender. Some teens 
may foreclose on a gender identity as a way of dealing with this 
uncertainty, and they may adopt more stereotypic male or female 
roles (Sinclair & Carlsson, 2013). 

Sexual identity: According to Carroll (2016), by age 14 most 
adolescents become interested in intimate relationships, and they 
may begin sexual experimentation. Many adolescent feel pressure 
to express interest in opposite-sex relationships, even if they are 
not ready to do so. This pressure can be especially stressful for 
those adolescents who are gay, lesbian, bisexual or questioning their 
sexual identity. Many non-heterosexual adolescents struggle with 
negative peer and family reactions during their exploration. A lack of 
parental acceptance, especially, can adversely affect the gay, lesbian 
or bisexual adolescent’s emerging sexual identity and can result 
in feelings of depression. In contrast, adolescents whose familes 
support their sexual identity have better health outcomes. 

Ethnic identity refers to how people come to terms with who they 
are based on their ethnic or racial ancestry. “The task of ethnic 
identity formation involves sorting out and resolving positive and 
negative feelings and attitudes about one’s own ethnic group and 
about other groups and identifying one’s place in relation to both” 
(Phinney, 2006, p. 119). When groups differ in status in a culture, 
those from the non-dominant group have to be cognizant of the 
customs and values of those from the dominant culture. The reverse 


is rarely the case. This makes ethnic identity far less salient for 
members of the dominant culture. In the United States, those of 
European ancestry engage in less exploration of ethnic identity, 
than do those of non-European ancestry (Phinney, 1989). However, 
according to the U.S. Census (2012) more than 40% of Americans 
under the age of 18 are from ethnic minorities. For many ethnic 
minority teens, discovering one’s ethnic identity is an important 
part of identity formation. 

Phinney’s model of ethnic identity formation is based on Erikson’s 
and Marcia’s model of identity formation (Phinney, 1990; Syed & 
Juang, 2014). Through the process of exploration and commitment, 
individual’s come to understand and create an ethic identity. 
Phinney suggests three stages or statuses with regard to ethnic 
identity: 

1. Unexamined Ethnic Identity: Adolescents and adults who have 
not been exposed to ethnic identity issues may be in the first 
stage, unexamined ethnic identity. This is often characterized 
with a preference for the dominant culture, or where the 
individual has given little thought to the question of their 
ethnic heritage. This is similar to diffusion in Marcia’s model of 
identity. Included in this group are also those who have 



adopted the ethnicity of their parents and other family 
members with little thought about the issues themselves, 
similar to Marcia’s foreclosure status (Phinney, 1990). 
2. Ethnic Identity Search: Adolescents and adults who are 
exploring the customs, culture, and history of their ethnic 
group are in the ethnic identity search stage, similar to 
Marcia’s moratorium status (Phinney, 1990). Often some event 
“awakens” a teen or adult to their ethnic group; either a 
personal experience with prejudice, a highly profiled case in 
the media, or even a more positive event that recognizes the 
contribution of someone from the individual’s ethnic group. 
Teens and adults in this stage will immerse themselves in their 
ethnic culture. For some, “it may lead to a rejection of the 
values of the dominant culture” (Phinney, 1990, p. 503). 
3. Achieved Ethnic Identity: Those who have actively explored 
their culture are likely to have a deeper appreciation and 
understanding of their ethnic heritage, leading to progress 
toward an achieved ethnic identity (Phinney, 1990). An 
achieved ethnic identity does not necessarily imply that the 
individual is highly involved in the customs and values of their 
ethnic culture. One can be confident in their ethnic identity 
without wanting to maintain the language or other customs. 


The development of ethnic identity takes time, with about 25% of 
tenth graders from ethnic minority backgrounds having explored 
and resolved the issues (Phinney, 1989). The more ethnically 
homogeneous the high school, the less identity exploration and 
achievement (UmanaTaylor, 2003). Moreover, even in more 
ethnically diverse high schools, teens tend to spend more time 
with their own group, reducing exposure to other ethnicities. This 
may explain why, for many, college becomes the time of ethnic 
identity exploration. “[The] transition to college may serve as a 
consciousness-raising experience that triggers exploration” (Syed & 
Azmitia, 2009, p. 618). 

It is also important to note that those who do achieve ethnic 


identity may periodically reexamine the issues of ethnicity. This 
cycling between exploration and achievement is common not only 
for ethnic identity formation, but in other aspects of identity 
development (Grotevant, 1987) and is referred to as MAMA cycling 
or moving back and forth between moratorium and achievement. 

Bicultural/Multiracial Identity: Ethnic minorities must wrestle 
with the question of how, and to what extent, they will identify 
with the culture of the surrounding society and with the culture 
of their family. Phinney (2006) suggests that people may handle it 
in different ways. Some may keep the identities separate, others 
may combine them in some way, while others may reject some 
of them. Bicultural identity means the individual sees himself or 
herself as part of both the ethnic minority group and the larger 
society. Those who are multiracial, that is whose parents come from 
two or more ethnic or racial groups, have a more challenging task. 
In some cases, their appearance may be ambiguous. This can lead 
to others constantly asking them to categorize themselves. Phinney 
(2006) notes that the process of identity formation may start earlier 
and take longer to accomplish in those who are not mono-racial. 

Negative Identity: A negative identity is the adoption of norms 
and values that are the opposite of one’s family and culture, and it 
is assumed to be one of the more problematic outcomes of identity 
development in young people (Hihara, Umemura, & Sigimura, 2019). 
Those with a negative identity hold dichotomous beliefs, and 
consequently divide the world into two categories (e.g., friend or 
foe, good or bad). Hihara et al. suggest that this may be because 
teens with a negative identity cannot integrate information and 
beliefs that exist in both their inner and outer worlds. In addition, 
those with a negative identity are generally hostile and cynical 
toward society, often because they do not trust the world around 
them. These beliefs may lead teens to engage in delinquent and 
criminal behavior and prevent them from engaging in more positive 
acts that could be beneficial to society. 


Parents and Teens: Autonomy and Attachment 

While most adolescents get along with their parents, they do spend 
less time with them (Smetana, 2011). This decrease in the time spent 
with families may be a reflection of a teenager’s greater desire for 
independence or autonomy. It can be difficult for many parents to 
deal with this desire for autonomy. However, it is likely adaptive 
for teenagers to increasingly distance themselves and establish 
relationships outside of their families in preparation for adulthood. 
This means that both parents and teenagers need to strike a balance 
between autonomy, while still maintaining close and supportive 
familial relationships. 

Children in middle and late childhood are increasingly granted 
greater freedom regarding moment-to-moment decision making. 
This continues in adolescence, as teens are demanding greater 
control in decisions that affect their daily lives. This can increase 
conflict between parents and their teenagers. For many 
adolescents, this conflict centers on chores, homework, curfew, 
dating, and personal appearance. These are all things many teens 
believe they should manage that parents previously had 
considerable control over. Teens report more conflict with their 
mothers, as many mothers believe they should still have some 
control over many of these areas, yet often report their mothers to 
be more encouraging and supportive (Costigan, Cauce, & Etchison, 
2007). As teens grow older, more compromise is reached between 
parents and teenagers (Smetana, 2011). Parents are more controlling 
of daughters, especially early maturing girls, than they are sons 
(Caspi, Lynam, Moffitt, & Silva, 1993). In addition, culture and 
ethnicity also play a role in how restrictive parents are with the daily 
lives of their children (Chen, Vansteenkiste, Beyers, Soensens, & Van 
Petegem, 2013). 

Having supportive, less conflict ridden relationships with parents 
also benefits teenagers. Research on attachment in adolescence 
find that teens who are still securely attached to their parents have 


less emotional problems (Rawatlal, Kliewer & Pillay, 2015), are less 
likely to engage in drug abuse and other criminal behaviors (Meeus, 
Branje & Overbeek, 2004), and have more positive peer relationships 
(Shomaker & Furman, 2009). 

Peers 

As children become adolescents, they usually begin spending more 
time with their peers and less time with their families, and these 
peer interactions are increasingly unsupervised by adults. Children’s 
notions of friendship often focus on shared activities, whereas 
adolescents’ notions of friendship increasingly focus on intimate 
exchanges of thoughts and feelings. During adolescence, peer 
groups evolve from primarily single-sex to mixed-sex. Adolescents 
within a peer group tend to be similar to one another in behavior 
and attitudes, which has been explained as a function of homophily, 
that is, adolescents who are similar to one another choose to spend 
time together in a “birds of a feather flock together” way. 
Adolescents who spend time together also shape each other’s 
behavior and attitudes. 


Peers can serve both positive and negative functions during 
adolescence. Negative peer pressure can lead adolescents to make 
riskier decisions or engage in more problematic behavior than they 
would alone or in the presence of their family. For example, 
adolescents are much more likely to drink alcohol, use drugs, and 
commit crimes when they are with their friends than when they are 
alone or with their family. One of the most widely studied aspects 
of adolescent peer influence is known as deviant peer contagion 
(Dishion & Tipsord, 2011), which is the process by which peers 
reinforce problem behavior by laughing or showing other signs of 
approval that then increase the likelihood of future problem 
behavior. 

However, peers also serve as an important source of social 
support and companionship during adolescence, and adolescents 
with positive peer relationships are happier and better adjusted 
than those who are socially isolated or have conflictual peer 
relationships. 

Crowds are an emerging level of peer relationships in 
adolescence. In contrast to friendships, which are reciprocal dyadic 
relationships, and cliques, which refer to groups of individuals who 
interact frequently, crowds are characterized more by shared 
reputations or images than actual interactions (Brown & Larson, 
2009). These crowds reflect different prototypic identities, such as 
jocks or brains, and are often linked with adolescents’ social status 
and peers’ perceptions of their values or behaviors. 

Romantic Relationships 

Adolescence is the developmental period during which romantic 
relationships typically first emerge. By the end of adolescence, most 
American teens have had at least one romantic relationship (Dolgin, 
2011). However, culture does play a role as Asian Americans and 
Latinas are less likely to date than other ethnic groups (Connolly, 


Craig, Goldberg, & Pepler, 2004). Dating serves many purposes for 
teens, including having fun, companionship, status, socialization, 
sexual experimentation, intimacy, and partner selection for those in 
late adolescence (Dolgin, 2011). 

There are several stages in the dating process beginning with 
engaging in mixed-sex group activities in early adolescence (Dolgin, 
2011). The same-sex peer groups that were common during 
childhood expand into mixed-sex peer groups that are more 
characteristic of adolescence. Romantic relationships often form in 
the context of these mixed-sex peer groups (Connolly, Furman, & 
Konarski, 2000). Interacting in mixed-sex groups is easier for teens 
as they are among a supportive group of friends, can observe others 
interacting, and are kept safe from a too early intimate relationship. 
By middle adolescence, teens are engaging in brief, casual dating or 
in group dating with established couples (Dolgin, 2011). Then in late 
adolescence dating involves exclusive, intense relationships. These 
relationships tend to be long-lasting and continue for a year or 
longer, however, they may also interfere with friendships. 

Although romantic relationships during adolescence are often 
short-lived rather than long-term committed partnerships, their 
importance should not be minimized. Adolescents spend a great 
deal of time focused on romantic relationships, and their positive 
and negative emotions are more tied to romantic relationships, or 
lack thereof than to friendships, family relationships, or school 
(Furman & Shaffer, 2003). Romantic relationships contribute to 
adolescents’ identity formation, changes in family and peer 
relationships, and emotional and behavioral adjustment. 


Furthermore, romantic relationships are centrally connected to 
adolescents’ emerging sexuality. Parents, policymakers, and 
researchers have devoted a great deal of attention to adolescents’ 
sexuality, in large part because of concerns related to sexual 
intercourse, contraception, and preventing teen pregnancies. 
However, sexuality involves more than this narrow focus. For 
example, adolescence is often when individuals who are lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, or transgender come to perceive themselves as such 
(Russell, Clarke, & Clary, 2009). Thus, romantic relationships are a 
domain in which adolescents experiment with new behaviors and 
identities. 

However, a negative dating relationship can adversely affect an 
adolescent’s development. Soller (2014) explored the link between 
relationship inauthenticity and mental health. Relationship 
inauthenticity refers to an incongruence between thoughts/
feelings and actions within a relationship. Desires to gain partner 
approval and demands in the relationship may negatively affect an 
adolescent’s sense of authenticity. Soller found that relationship 
inauthenticity was positively correlated with poor mental health, 


including depression, suicidal ideation, and suicide attempts, 
especially for females. 

References 

Albert, D., & Steinberg, L. (2011). Adolescent judgment and decision 
making. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21, 211– 224. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (Fifth Edition). Washington, D. C.: 
Author. 

Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales, J., & Nielsen, S. (2011). Mortality 
rates in patients with anorexia nervosa and other eating 
disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(7), 724-731. 

Birkeland, M. S., Melkivik, O., Holsen, I., & Wold, B. (2012). 
Trajectories of global self-esteem during adolescence. Journal of 
Adolescence, 35, 43-54. 

Bosson, J. K., Vandello, J., & Buckner, C. (2019). The psychology of sex 
and gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Brass, N., McKellar, North, E., & Ryan, A. (2019). Early adolescents’ 
adjustment at school: A fresh look at grade and gender 
differences. Journal of Early Adolescence, 39(5), 689-716. 

Brown, B. B., & Larson, J. (2009). Peer relationships in adolescence. 
In R. M. Lerner & L. Steinberg (Eds.), Handbook of adolescent 
psychology (pp. 74–103). New York, NY: Wiley. 

Carney, C., McGehee, D., Harland, K., Weiss, M., & Raby, M. (2015, 
March). Using naturalistic driving data to assess the prevalence of 
environmental factors and driver behaviors in teen driver crashes. 
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety. Retrieved from 
https://www.aaafoundation.org/sites/default/files/
2015TeenCrashCausationReport.pdf 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Caspi, A., Lynam, D., Moffitt, T. E., & Silva, P. A. (1993). Unraveling 


girls’ delinquency: Biological, dispositional, and contextual 
contributions to adolescent misbehavior. Developmental 
Psychology, 29(1), 19-30. 

Center for Disease Control. (2004). Trends in the prevalence of 
sexual behaviors, 1991-2003. Bethesda, MD: Author. 

Center for Disease Control. (2016). Birth rates (live births) per 1,000 
females aged 15–19 years, by race and Hispanic ethnicity, select 
years. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/teenpregnancy/
about/birth-rates-chart-2000-2011-text.htm 

Centers for Disease Control. (2018a). Teen drivers: Get the facts. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/motorvehiclesafety/
teen_drivers/teendrivers_factsheet.html 

Centers for Disease Control. (2018b). Trends in the behaviors that 
contribute to unintentional injury: National Youth Risk Behavioral 
Survey. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/
data/yrbs/pdf/trends/
2017_unintentional_injury_trend_yrbs.pdf 

Chein, J., Albert, D., O’Brien, L., Uckert, K., & Steinberg, L. (2011). 
Peers increase adolescent risk taking by enhancing activity in the 
brain’s reward circuitry. Developmental Science, 14(2), F1-F10. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01035.x 

Chen, B., Vansteenkiste, M., Beyers, W., Soensens, B., & Van 
Petegem, S. (2013). Autonomy in family decision making for 
Chinese adolescents: Disentangling the dual meaning of 
autonomy. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 44, 1184- 1209. 

Connolly, J., Craig, W., Goldberg, A., & Pepler, D. (2004). Mixed-
gender groups, dating, and romantic relationships in early 
adolescence. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 14, 185-207. 

Connolly, J., Furman, W., & Konarski, R. (2000). The role of peers 
in the emergence of heterosexual romantic relationships in 
adolescence. Child Development, 71, 1395–1408. 

Costigan, C. L., Cauce, A. M., & Etchinson, K. (2007). Changes in 
African American mother-daughter relationships during 
adolescence: Conflict, autonomy, and warmth. In B. J. R. 


Leadbeater & N. Way (Eds.), Urban girls revisited: Building 
strengths (pp. 177-201). New York NY: New York University Press. 

Côtè, J. E. (2006). Emerging adulthood as an institutionalized 
moratorium: Risks and benefits to identity formation. In J. J. 
Arnett & J. T. Tanner (Eds.), Emerging adults in America: Coming 
of age in the 21st century, (pp. 85-116). Washington D.C.: American 
Psychological Association Press. 

Crain, W. (2005). Theories of development concepts and 
applications (5th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson. 

Crooks, K. L., & Baur, K. (2007). Our sexuality (10th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth. 

Crosnoe, R., & Benner, A. D. (2015). Children at school. In M. H. 
Bornstein, T. Leventhal, & R. M. Lerner (Eds.). Handbook of child 
psychology and developmental science: Ecological settings and 
processes (pp. 268-304). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 

De Wit, D. J., Karioja, K., Rye, B. J., & Shain, M. (2011). Perceptions of 
declining classmate and teacher support following the transition 
to high school: Potential correlates of increasing student mental 
health difficulties. Psychology in the Schools, 48, 556-572. 

Dishion, T. J., & Tipsord, J. M. (2011). Peer contagion in child and 
adolescent social and emotional development. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 62, 189–214. 

Dobbs, D. (2012). Beautiful brains. National Geographic, 220(4), 36. 
Dolgin, K. G. (2011). The adolescent: Development, relationships, 
and culture (13th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson. 

Duchesne, S., Larose, S., & Feng, B. (2019). Achievement goals and 
engagement with academic work in early high school: Does 
seeking help from teachers matter? Journal of Early Adolescence, 
39(2), 222-252. 

Dudovitz, R.N., Chung, P.J., Elliott, M.N., Davies, S.L., Tortolero, S,… 
Baumler, E. (2015). Relationship of age for grade and pubertal 
stage to early initiation of substance use. Preventing Chronic 
Disease, 12, 150234. doi:10.5888/pcd12.150234. 

Eccles, J. S., & Rosner, R. W. (2015). School and community 
influences on human development. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E. 


Lamb (Eds.), Developmental science (7th ed.). NY: Psychology 
Press. 

Elkind, D. (1967). Egocentrism in adolescence. Child Development, 
38, 1025-1034. 

Euling, S. Y., Herman-Giddens, M.E., Lee, P.A., Selevan, S. G., Juul, 
A., Sorensen, T. I., Dunkel, L., Himes, J.H., Teilmann, G., & Swan, 
S.H. (2008). Examination of US puberty-timing data from 1940 to 
1994 for secular trends: panel findings. Pediatrics, 121, S172-91. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2007-1813D. 

Eveleth, P. & Tanner, J. (1990). Worldwide variation in human growth 
(2nd edition). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Furman, W., & Shaffer, L. (2003). The role of romantic relationships 
in adolescent development. In P. Florsheim (Ed.), Adolescent 
romantic relations and sexual behavior: Theory, research, and 
practical implications (pp. 3–22). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Garcia, A. R., Metraux, S., Chen, C., Park, J., Culhane, D., & 
Furstenberg, F. (2018). Patterns of multisystem service use and 
school dropout among seventh-, eighth-, and ninth-grade 
students. Journal of Early Adolescence, 38(8), 1041-1073. 

Giedd, J. N. (2015). The amazing teen brain. Scientific American, 
312(6), 32-37. Goodman, G. (2006). Acne and acne scarring: The 
case for active and early intervention. Australia Family Physicians, 
35, 503- 504. 

Graber, J. A. (2013). Pubertal timing and the development of 
psychopathology in adolescence and beyond. Hormones and 
Behavior, 64, 262-289. 

Grotevant, H. (1987). Toward a process model of identity formation. 
Journal of Adolescent Research, 2, 203-222 

Harter, S. (2006). The self. In N. Eisenberg (Ed.), Handbook of child 
psychology: Vol. 3 Social, emotional, and personality development 
(6th ed., pp. 505-570). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Harter, S. (2012). Emerging self-processes during childhood and 
adolescence. In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney, (Eds.), Handbook of 
self and identity (2nd ed., pp. 680-715). New York: Guilford. 

Hihara, S., Umemura, T., & Sigimura, K. (2019). Considering the 


negatively formed identity: Relationships between negative 
identity and problematic psychosocial beliefs. Journal of 
Adolescence, 70, 24-32. 

Hudson, J. I., Hiripi, E., Pope, H. G., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). The 
prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 61(3), 
348-358. 

Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. (2017). Fatality facts: 
Teenagers 2016. Retrieved from http://www.iihs.org/iihs/
topics/t/teenagers/fatalityfacts/teenagersExternal 

Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York NY: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 

Kim-Spoon, J., Longo, G.S., & McCullough, M.E. (2012). Parent-
adolescent relationship quality as moderator for the influences 
of parents’ religiousness on adolescents’ religiousness and 
adjustment. Journal or Youth & Adolescence, 41 (12), 1576-1578. 

King’s College London. (2019). Genetic study revelas metabolic 
origins of anorexia. Retrieved from www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2019/07/190715164655.htm 

Klaczynski, P. (2001). Analytic and heuristic processing influences on 
adolescent reasoning and decision-making. Child Development, 
72 (3), 844-861. 

Klauer, S. G., Gun, F., Simons-Morton, B. G., Ouimet, M. C., Lee, S. 
E., & Dingus, T. A. (2014). Distracted driving a risk of road crashes 
among novice and experienced drivers. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 370, 54-59. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa1204142 

Kuhn, D. (2013). Reasoning. In. P.D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford 
handbook of developmental psychology. (Vol. 1, pp. 744-764). New 
York NY: Oxford University Press. 

Lee, J. C., & Staff, J. (2007). When work matters: The varying impact 
of work intensity on high school dropout. Sociology of Education, 
80(2), 158–178. 

Longest, K. C., & Shanahan, M. J. (2007). Adolescent work intensity 
and substance use: The mediational and moderational roles of 
parenting. Journal of Family and Marriage, 69(3), 703-720. 


Luciano, M., & Collins, P. F. (2012). Incentive motivation, cognitive 
control, and the adolescent brain: Is it time for a paradigm shift. 
Child Development Perspectives, 6 (4), 394-399. 

March of Dimes. (2012). Teenage pregnancy. Retrieved from 
http://www.marchofdimes.org/materials/teenage-
pregnancy.pdf 

Marcia, J. (2010). Life transitions and stress in the context of 
psychosocial development. In T.W. Miller (Ed.), Handbook of 
stressful transitions across the lifespan (Part 1, pp. 19-34). New 
York, NY: Springer Science & Business Media. 

Marsh, H. W., & Kleitman, S. (2005). Consequences of employment 
during high school: Character building, subversion of academic 
goals, or a threshold? American Educational Research Journal, 42, 
331–369. 

McAdams, D. P. (2013). Self and Identity. In R. Biswas-Diener & E. 
Diener (Eds), Noba textbook series: Psychology. Champaign, IL: 
DEF publishers. Retrieved from: nobaproject.com. 

McClintock, M. & Herdt, G. (1996). Rethinking puberty: The 
development of sexual attraction. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 5, 178-183. 

Meeus, W., Branje, S., & Overbeek, G. J. (2004). Parents and partners 
in crime: A six-year longitudinal study on changes in supportive 
relationships and delinquency in adolescence and young 
adulthood. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 45(7), 
1288-1298. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2004.00312.x 

Mendle, J., Harden, K. P., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Graber, J. A. (2010). 
Development’s tortoise and hare: Pubertal timing, pubertal 
tempo, and depressive symptoms in boys and girls. 
Developmental Psychology, 46,1341–1353. doi:10.1037/a0020205 

Mendle, J., Harden, K. P., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Graber, J. A. (2012). Peer 
relationships and depressive symptomatology in boys at puberty. 
Developmental Psychology, 48(2), 429–435. doi: 10.1037/a0026425 

Miller, B. C., Benson, B., & Galbraith, K. A. (2001). Family relationships 
and adolescent pregnancy risk: A research synthesis. 
Developmental Review, 21(1), 1-38. doi:10.1006/drev.2000.0513 


National Center for Health Statistics. (2014). Leading causes of 
death. Retrieved from: http://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/
leadcaus10_us.html 

National Center for Statistics and Analysis. (2016, May). Young 
drivers: 2014 data. (Traffic Safety Facts. Report No. DOT HS 812 
278). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration. Retrieved from: http://wwwnrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/
Pubs/812278.pdf 

National Eating Disorders Association. (2016). Health consequences 
of eating disorders. Retrieved from 
https://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/health-consequences-
eating-disorders 

National Institutes of Mental Health. (2016). Eating disorders. 
Retrieved from https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/
eating-disorders/index.shtml 

National Sleep Foundation. (2016). Teens and sleep. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/sleep topics/teens-and-sleep 

Nelson, A., & Spears Brown, C. (2019). Too pretty for homework: 
Sexualized gender stereotypes predict academic attitudes for 
gener-typical early adolescent girls. Journal of Early Adolescence, 
39(4), 603-617. 

Office of Adolescent Health. (2018). A day in the life. Retrieved from 
https://www.hhs.gov/ash/oah/facts-and-stats/day-in-thelife/
index.html 

Pew Research Center. (2015). College-educated men taking their 
time becoming dads. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/06/19/college-
educated-men-take-their-time-becoming-dads/ 

Phinney, J. S. (1989). Stages of ethnic identity development in 
minority group adolescents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 9, 34- 
49. 

Phinney, J. S. (1990). Ethnic identity in adolescents and adults: 
Review of research. Psychological Bulletin, 108(3), 499-514. 
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.108.3.499 

Phinney, J. S. (2006). Ethnic identity exploration. In J. J. Arnett & 


J. L. Tanner (Eds.) Emerging adults in America: Coming of age 
in the 21st Century. (pp. 117-134) Washington DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Rawatlal, N., Kliewer, W., & Pillay, B. J. (2015). Adolescent attachment, 
family functioning and depressive symptoms. South African 
Journal of Psychiatry, 21(3), 80-85. doi:10.7196/SAJP.8252 

Rosenbaum, J. (2006). Reborn a virgin: Adolescents’ retracting of 
virginity pledges and sexual histories. American Journal of Public 
Health, 96(6), 1098-1103. 

Ryan, A. M., Shim, S. S., & Makara, K. A. (2013). Changes in academic 
adjustment and relational self-worth across the transition to 
middle school. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 42, 1372-1384. 

Russell, S. T., Clarke, T. J., & Clary, J. (2009). Are teens “post-gay”? 
Contemporary adolescents’ sexual identity labels. Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence, 38, 884–890. 

Sadker, M. (2004). Gender equity in the classroom: The unfinished 
agenda. In M. Kimmel (Ed.), The gendered society reader, 2nd 
edition. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Schwartz, P. D., Maynard, A. M., & Uzelac, S. M. (2008). Adolescent 
egocentrism: A contemporary view. Adolescence, 43, 441- 447. 

Seifert, K. (2012). Educational psychology. Retrieved from 
http://cnx.org/content/col11302/1.2 

Shin, H., & Ryan, A. M. (2014). Early adolescent friendships and 
academic adjustment: Examining selection and influence 
processes with longitudinal social network analysis. 
Developmental Psychology, 50(11), 2462-2472. 

Shomaker, L. B., & Furman, W. (2009). Parent-adolescent 
relationship qualities, internal working models, and attachment 
styles as predictors of adolescents’ interactions with friends. 
Journal or Social and Personal Relationships, 2, 579-603. 

Sinclair, S., & Carlsson, R. (2013). What will I be when I grow up? 
The impact of gender identity threat on adolescents’ occupational 
preferences. Journal of Adolescence, 36(3), 465-474. 

Smetana, J. G. (2011). Adolescents, families, and social development. 
Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. Soller, B. (2014). Caught in a bad 


romance: Adolescent romantic relationships and mental health. 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 55(1), 56-72. 

Staff, J., Schulenberg, J. E., & Bachman, J. G. (2010). Adolescent work 
intensity, school performance, and academic engagement. 
Sociology of Education, 83, p. 183–200. 

Staff, J., Van Eseltine, M., Woolnough, A., Silver, E., & Burrington, 
L. (2011). Adolescent work experiences and family formation 
behavior. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 22(1), 150-164. 
doi:10.1111/j.1532-7795.2011.00755.x 

Steinberg, L., Icenogle, G., Shulman, E.P., et al. (2018). Around the 
world, adolescence is a time of heightened sensation seeking and 
immature self-regulation. Developmental Science, 21, e12532. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12532 

Syed, M., & Azmitia, M. (2009). Longitudinal trajectories of ethnic 
identity during the college years. Journal of Research on 
Adolescence, 19, 601-624. doi:10.1111/j.1532-7795.2009.00609.x 

Syed, M., & Juang, L. P. (2014). Ethnic identity, identity coherence, 
and psychological functioning: Testing basic assumptions of the 
developmental model. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority 
Psychology, 20(2), 176-190. doi:10.1037/a0035330 

Tartamella, L., Herscher, E., Woolston, C. (2004). Generation extra 
large: Rescuing our children from the obesity epidemic. New York: 
Basic Books. 

Taylor, J. & Gilligan, C., & Sullivan, A. (1995). Between voice and 
silence: Women and girls, race and relationship. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 

Thomas, R. M. (1979). Comparing theories of child development. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Wadsworth. 

Troxel, W. M., Rodriquez, A., Seelam, R., Tucker, J. Shih, R., & 
D’Amico. (2019). Associations of longitudinal sleep trajectories 
with risky sexual behavior during late adolescence. Health 
Psychology. Retrieved from https://psycnet.apa.org/
doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Fhea0000753 

Umana-Taylor, A. (2003). Ethnic identity and self-esteem. 


Examining the roles of social context. Journal of Adolescence, 27, 
139-146. 

United States Census. (2012). 2000-2010 Intercensal estimates. 
Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/popest/data/index.html 

United States Department of Education. (2018). Trends in high 
school dropout and completion rates in the United States: 2018. 
Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2019/2019117.pdf 

United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics 
(2016). Employment projections. Retrieved from 
http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_chart_001.htm 

United States Department of Labor, Office of Disability Employment 
Policy. (2019). School based prepatory experiences. Retrieved 
from: https://www.dol.gov/odep/categories/youth/school.htm 

University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center. (2000). Acne. 
Retrieved from http://www.mednet.ucla.edu 

Vaillancourt, M. C., Paiva, A. O., Véronneau, M., & Dishion, T. (2019). 
How do individual predispositions and family dynamics 
contribute to academic adjustment through the middle school 
years? The mediating role of friends’ characteristics. Journal of 
Early Adolescence, 39(4), 576-602. 

Wade, T. D., Keski‐Rahkonen, A., & Hudson, J. I. (2011). Epidemiology 
of eating disorders. Textbook of Psychiatric Epidemiology, Third 
Edition, 343-360. 

Weintraub, K. (2016). Young and sleep deprived. Monitor on 
Psychology, 47(2), 46-50. Weir, K. (2015). Marijuana and the 
developing brain. Monitor on Psychology, 46(10), 49-52. 

Weir, K. (2016). The risks of earlier puberty. Monitor on Psychology, 
47(3), 41-44. 

Yau, J. C., & Reich, S. M. (2018). “It’s just a lot of work”: Adolescents’ 
self-presentation norms and practices on Facebook and 
Instagram. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 29(1), 196-209. 


Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 6 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


PART 
X 
DEVELOPMENT IN EARLY 
ADULTHOOD 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore and connect Psychosocial, Cognitive, 
and Psychosexual Development 
Explore and connect another Theory, Approach, 
or Perspective to work in critical thinking skills for 
client assessments 
Exploring important aspects of a person’s 
experience and ability to justify why they are 
important 



Vignette 

Don and Keith
Photo by Shelby Cohron on Unsplash 

Don Stephens, 25 y/o, and 
Keith James, 33 y/o, have been 
together for 7 years. They 
married last year when New 
York legalized same sex 
marriages through legislation 
and are now planning to be 
parents for the first time this 
fall. They decided they wanted to 
expand their family shortly after 
getting married and found a 
surrogate, Paige, who is now 6 
months pregnant with twins. 
While they are ecstatic, Don and 
Keith are both starting to 
experience anxiety about what it 
will be like to be parents. They do 
not have financial concerns but are struggling more with the 
uncertainties of the future: Will they be good fathers? Will they be able 
to care for TWO babies at once? Will their children face hardships due 
to having gay parents? 

They have decided to begin therapy with a Licensed Certified Social 
Worker (LCSW) for some support. She greets them warmly and asks 
what brings them in to see her. Don and Keith share their story and 
uncertainties related to becoming fathers. 

Don shares some of his childhood experiences with his own father, 
who was verbally abusive, and fears he will be “just like my dad, 
because that’s all I know, I mean, can you even be a good father when 
you didn’t have one yourself? How will I know what to do? I have my 
dad’s temper and I’m afraid it’s going to come out if I get mad and 
that’s the last thing I want, my kids to fear me or me say something I 
don’t mean and then I’ll ruin them. I’m also not working right now. I’m 


planning to go to graduate 
school, but I’m still not sure about what I 
really want to do….”. 

Keith shares his fears are more related to societal views and 
responses to their family. He states “It’s hard being a gay man or 
couple sometimes, I see the way some people look at us when we walk 
by and that’s so hard in itself some days, I can’t imagine how much 
more it will hurt when we have our children. It keeps me up at night 
thinking about how our children may be treated simply because of 
who their parents are or what their family looks like”. 


Critical Thinking: 

1. What stage of Erikson’s Theory of Psychosocial 
Development are they currently in? Are they 
meeting the goals of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any struggles with their goals 
in this stage? Examples? 
2. What theory, approach, or perspective from 
previous Dimensions (PIE, Biopsychosocial, 
Sociocultural, or Social Change) would you use to 
assess this client? Why? 
3. What do you feel are the most important 
aspects (physical development, attachment, sexual 
development, etc) to consider for this client? 
Why? 



References 

Hutchinson, E. D. (2019). Dimensions of human behavior (Sixth 
edition). Sage Publications, Inc. 

 



Chapter 22: Physical 
Development in Early 
Adulthood 

Chapter 22 Learning Objectives 

Summarize the overall physical growth in early 
adulthood 
Describe statistics, possible causes, and 
consequences of obesity 
Explain how early adulthood is a healthy, yet risky 
time of life 
Identify the risk factors for substance use 
Describe the changes in brain maturation 
Describe gender in adulthood, including gender 
minorities and stress 
Define sexuality and explain the female and male 
reproductive systems 
Describe the brain areas and hormones responsible 
for sexual behavior 
Identify sexually transmitted infections 
Describe cultural views related to sexuality 
Describe research on sexual orientation 



The Physiological Peak 

People in their mid-twenties to mid-forties are considered to be in 
early adulthood. By the time we reach early adulthood, our physical 
maturation is complete, although our height and weight may 
increase slightly. Those in their early twenties are probably at the 
peak of their physiological development, including muscle strength, 
reaction time, sensory abilities, and cardiac functioning. The 
reproductive system, motor skills, strength, and lung capacity are all 
operating at their best. Most professional athletes are at the top of 
their game during this stage, and many women have children in the 
early-adulthood years (Boundless, 2016). 

The aging process actually begins during early adulthood. Around 
the age of 30, many changes begin to occur in different parts of the 
body. For example, the lens of the eye starts to stiffen and thicken, 
resulting in changes in vision (usually affecting the ability to focus 
on close objects). 

Sensitivity to sound decreases; this happens twice as quickly for 
men as for women. Hair can start to thin and become gray around 
the age of 35, although this may happen earlier for some individuals 
and later for others. The skin becomes drier and wrinkles start 
to appear by the end of early adulthood. This includes a decline 
in response time and the ability to recover quickly from physical 
exertion. The immune system also becomes less adept at fighting 
off illness, and reproductive capacity starts to decline (Boundless, 
2016). 

Obesity 

Although at the peak of physical health, a concern for early adults 
is the current rate of obesity. Results from the National Center for 
Health Statistics indicated that an estimated 70.7% of U.S. adults 


aged 20 and over were overweight in 2012 (CDC, 2015b) and by 2016, 
39.8% were considered obese (Hales, Carroll, Fryar, & Ogden, 2017)). 
Body mass index (BMI), expressed as weight in kilograms divided 
by height in meters squared (kg/m2), is commonly used to classify 
overweight (BMI 25.0–29.9), obesity (BMI greater than or equal to 
30.0), and extreme obesity (BMI greater than or equal to 40.0). The 
current statistics are an increase from the 2013-2014 statistics that 
indicated that an estimated 35.1% were obese, and 6.4% extremely 
obese (Fryar, Carroll, & Ogden, 2014). The CDC also indicated that 
one’s 20s are the prime time to gain weight as the average person 
gains one to two pounds per year from early adulthood into middle 
adulthood. The average man in his 20s weighs around 185 pounds 
and by his 30s weighs approximately 200 pounds. The average 
American woman weighs 162 pounds in her 20s and 170 pounds in 
her 30s. 

The American obesity crisis is also reflected worldwide (Wighton, 
2016). In 2014, global obesity rates for men were measured at 10.8% 
and among women 14.9%. This translates to 266 million obese men 
and 375 million obese women in the world, and more people were 
identified as obese than underweight. Although obesity is seen 
throughout the world, more obese men and women live in China 
and the USA than in any other country. Figure 7.6 illustrates how 
waist circumference is also used as a measure of obesity. Figure 
7.7 demonstrates the percentage growth for youth (2-19 years) and 
adults (20-60+ years) identified as obese between 1999 and 2016. 

Figure 7.6 


Causes of Obesity: According to the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) (2016), obesity originates from a complex set 
of contributing factors, including one’s environment, behavior, and 
genetics. Societal factors include culture, education, food marketing 
and promotion, the quality of food, and the physical activity 
environment available. Behaviors leading to obesity include diet, 
the amount of physical activity, and medication use. Lastly, there 
does not appear to be a single gene responsible for obesity. Rather, 
research has identified variants in several genes that may contribute 
to obesity by increasing hunger and food intake. Another genetic 
explanation is the mismatch between today’s environment and 
“energy-thrifty genes” that multiplied in the distant past when food 
sources were unpredictable. The genes that helped our ancestors 
survive occasional famines are now being challenged by 
environments in which food is plentiful all the time. Overall, obesity 
most likely results from complex interactions among the 
environment and multiple genes. 

Figure 7.7 


Obesity Health Consequences: Obesity is considered to be one of 
the leading causes of death in the United States and worldwide. 
Additionally, the medical care costs of obesity in the United States 
were estimated to be $147 billion in 2008. According to the CDC 
(2016) compared to those with a normal or healthy weight, people 
who are obese are at increased risk for many serious diseases and 
health conditions including: 

All-causes of death (mortality) 
High blood pressure (Hypertension) 
High LDL cholesterol, low HDL cholesterol, or high levels of 
triglycerides (Dyslipidemia) 
Type 2 diabetes 
Coronary heart disease 
Stroke 
Gallbladder disease 
Osteoarthritis (a breakdown of cartilage and bone within a 



joint) 
Sleep apnea and breathing problems 
Some cancers (endometrial, breast, colon, kidney, gallbladder, 
and liver) 
Low quality of life 
Mental illness, such as clinical depression, anxiety, and other 
mental disorders 
Body pain and difficulty with physical functioning 


A Healthy, But Risky Time 


Doctor’s visits are less frequent in early adulthood than for those in 
midlife and late adulthood and are necessitated primarily by injury 
and pregnancy (Berger, 2005). However, the top five causes of death 
in emerging and early adulthoods are non-intentional injury 
(including motor vehicle accidents), homicide, and suicide with 
cancer and heart disease completing the list (Heron, & Smith, 2007). 
Rates of violent death (homicide, suicide, and accidents) are highest 
among young adult males and vary by race and ethnicity. Rates 
of violent death are higher in the United States than in Canada, 
Mexico, Japan, and other selected countries. Males are 3 times more 
likely to die in auto accidents than are females (Frieden, 2011). 

Alcohol Abuse: A significant contributing factor to risky behavior 
is alcohol. According to 2014, National Survey on Drug Use and 
Health (National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), 
2016) 88% of people ages 18 or older reported that they drank 
alcohol at some point in their lifetime; 71% reported that they drank 
in the past year, and 57% reported drinking in the past month. 
Additionally, 6.7% reported that they engaged in heavy drinking in 
the past month. Heavy drinking is defined as drinking five or more 
drinks on the same occasion on each of five or more days in the 
past 30 days. Nearly 88,000 people (approximately 62,000 men and 
26,000 women) die from alcohol-related causes annually, making it 


the fourth leading preventable cause of death in the United States. 
In 2014, alcohol-impaired driving fatalities accounted for 9,967 
deaths (31% of overall driving fatalities). 

The NIAAA defines binge drinking when blood alcohol 
concentration levels reach 0.08 g/dL. This typically occurs after 
four drinks for women and five drinks for men in approximately 
two hours. In 2014, 25% of people ages 18 or older reported that 
they engaged in binge drinking in the past month. According to the 
NIAAA (2015) “Binge drinking poses serious health and safety risks, 
including car crashes, drunk-driving arrests, sexual assaults, and 
injuries. Over the long term, frequent binge drinking can damage 
the liver and other organs,” (p. 1). 

Alcohol and College Students: Results from the 2014 survey 
demonstrated a difference between the amount of alcohol 
consumed by college students and those of the same age who are 
not in college (NIAAA, 2016). 
Specifically, 60% of full-time college 
students ages 18–22 drank alcohol in the past month compared with 
51.5% of other persons of the same age not in college. In addition, 
38% of college students ages 18–22 engaged in binge drinking; that 
is, five or more drinks on one occasion in the past month, compared 
with 33.5% of other persons of the same age. Lastly, 12% of college 
students’ (ages 18–22) engaged in heavy drinking; that is, binge 
drinking on five or more occasions per month, in the past month. 
This compares with 9.5% of other emerging adults not in college. 

The consequences for college drinking are staggering, and the 
NIAAA (2016) estimates that each year the following occur: 

1,825 college students between the ages of 18 and 24 die from 
alcohol-related unintentional injuries, including motor-vehicle 
crashes. 
696,000 students between the ages of 18 and 24 are assaulted 
by another student who has been drinking. 
Roughly 1 in 5 college students meet the criteria for an Alcohol 
Use Disorder. 
About 1 in 4 college students report academic consequences 



from drinking, including missing class, falling behind in class, 
doing poorly on exams or papers, and receiving lower grades 
overall. (p. 1) 
97,000 students between the ages of 18 and 24 report 
experiencing alcohol-related sexual assault or date rape. 


The role alcohol plays in predicting acquaintance rape on college 
campuses is of particular concern. “Alcohol use in one the strongest 
predictors of rape and sexual assault on college campuses,” (Carroll, 
2016, p. 454). Krebs, Lindquist, Warner, Fisher and Martin (2009) 
found that over 80% of sexual assaults on college campuses involved 
alcohol. Being intoxicated increases a female’s risk of being the 
victim of date or acquaintance rape (Carroll, 2007). Females are 
more likely to blame themselves and to be blamed by others if they 
were intoxicated when raped. College students view perpetrators 
who were drinking as less responsible, and victims who were 
drinking as more responsible for the assaults (Untied, Orchowski, 
Mastroleo, & Gidycz, 2012). 

Factors Affecting College Students’ Drinking: Several factors 
associated with college life affect a student’s involvement with 
alcohol (NIAAA, 2015). 

These include the pervasive availability of alcohol, inconsistent 
enforcement of underage drinking laws, unstructured time, coping 
with stressors, and limited interactions with parents and other 
adults. 


Due to social pressures to conform and expectations when entering 
college, the first six weeks of freshman year are an especially 
susceptible time for students. Additionally, more drinking occurs in 
colleges with active Greek systems and athletic programs. Alcohol 
consumption is lowest among students living with their families and 
commuting, while it is highest among those living in fraternities and 
sororities. 

College Strategies to Curb Drinking: Strategies to address 
college drinking involve the individual-level and campus community 
as a whole. Identifying at-risk groups, such as first-year students, 
members of fraternities and sororities, and athletes have proven 
helpful in changing students’ knowledge, attitudes, and behavior 
regarding alcohol (NIAAA, 2015). 

Interventions include education and awareness programs, as well 
as intervention by health professionals. At the college-level, 
reducing the availability of alcohol has proven effective by 
decreasing both consumption and negative consequences. 

Non-Alcohol Substance Use: Illicit drug use peaks between the ages 
of 19 and 22 and then begins to decline. Additionally, 25% of those 


who smoke cigarettes, 33% of those who smoke marijuana, and 70% 
of those who abuse cocaine began using after age 17 (Volkow, 2004). 

Emerging adults (18 to 25) are the largest abusers of prescription 
opioid pain relievers, anti-anxiety medications, and Attention 
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder medication (National Institute on 
Drug Abuse, 2015). In 2016, opioid misuse within the past 12 months 
was reported by 3.6% of 12-17 year-olds and was twice as high 
among those 18-25 (Office of Adolescent Health, 2019). In 2014 more 
than 1700 emerging adults died from a prescription drug overdose. 
This is an increase of four times since 1999. Additionally, for every 
death, there were 119 emergency room visits. 

Daily marijuana use is at the highest level in three decades 
(National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2015). For those in college, 2014 
data indicate that 6% of college students smoke marijuana daily, 
while only 2% smoked daily in 1994. For noncollege students of the 
same age, the daily percentage is twice as high (approximately 12%). 
Additionally, according to a recent survey by the National Institute 
of Drug Abuse (2018), daily cigarette smoking is lower for those in 
college in comparison to non-college groups (see Figure 7.10). 

Figure 7.10 


Rates of violent death are influenced by substance use which peaks 
during emerging and early adulthood. Drugs impair judgment, 
reduce inhibitions, and alter mood, all of which can lead to 
dangerous behavior. Reckless driving, violent altercations, and 
forced sexual encounters are some examples. Drug and alcohol use 
increase the risk of sexually transmitted infections because people 
are more likely to engage in risky sexual behavior when under the 
influence. This includes having sex with someone who has had 
multiple partners, having anal sex without the use of a condom, 
having multiple partners, or having sex with someone whose history 
is unknown. Lastly, as previously discussed, drugs and alcohol 
ingested during pregnancy have a teratogenic effect on the 
developing embryo and fetus. 


Gender 

As previously discussed in chapter 4, gender is the cultural, social 
and psychological meanings associated with masculinity and 
feminity. A person’s sense of self as a member of a particular genderis known as gender identity. Because gender is considered a social 
construct, meaning that it does not exist naturally, but is instead 
a concept that is created by cultural and societal norms, there are 
cultural variations on how people express their gender identity. For 
example, in American culture, it is considered feminine to wear a 
dress or skirt. However, in many Middle Eastern, Asian, and African 
cultures, dresses or skirts (often referred to as sarongs, robes, or 
gowns) can be considered masculine. Similarly, the kilt worn by a 
Scottish male does not make him appear feminine in his culture. 

For many adults, the drive to adhere to masculine and feminine 
gender roles, or the societal expectations associated with being male 
or female, continues throughout life. In American culture, masculine 
roles have traditionally been associated with strength, aggression, 
and dominance, while feminine roles have traditionally been 
associated with passivity, nurturing, and subordination. Men tend 
to outnumber women in professions such as law enforcement, the 
military, and politics, while women tend to outnumber men in care-
related occupations such as childcare, healthcare, and social work. 
These occupational roles are examples of stereotypical American 
male and female behavior, derived not from biology or genetics, 
but from our culture’s traditions. Adherence to these roles may 
demonstrate fulfillment of social expectations, however, not 
necessarily personal preferences (Diamond, 2002). 

Consequently, many adults are challenging gender labels and 
roles, and the long-standing gender binary; that is, categorizing 
humans as only female and male, has been undermined by current 
psychological research (Hyde, Bigler, Joel, Tate, & van Anders, 2019). 
The term gender now encompasses a wide range of possible 
identities, including cisgender, transgender, agender, genderfluid, 


genderqueer, gender nonconforming, bigender, pangender, 
ambigender, non- gendered, intergender, and Two-spirit which is 
a modern umbrella term used by some indigenous North Americans 
to describe gender-variant individuals in their communities (Carroll, 
2016). Hyde et al. (2019) advocate for a conception of gender that 
stresses multiplicity and diversity and uses multiple categories that 
are not mutually exclusive. 

Gender Minority Discrimination: Gender nonconforming people 
are much more likely to experience harassment, bullying, and 
violence based on their gender identity; they also experience much 
higher rates of discrimination in housing, employment, healthcare, 
and education (Borgogna, McDermott, Aita, & Kridel, 2019; National 
Center for Transgender Equality, 2015). Transgender individuals of 
color face additional financial, social, and interpersonal challenges, 
in comparison to the transgender community as a whole, as a result 
of structural racism. Black transgender people reported the highest 
level of discrimination among all transgender individuals of color. 
As members of several intersecting minority groups, transgender 
people of color, and transgender women of color, in particular, are 
especially vulnerable to employment discrimination, poor health 
outcomes, harassment, and violence. Consequently, they face even 
greater obstacles than white transgender individuals and cisgender 
members of their own race. 


Gender Minority Status and Mental Health: Using data from over 
43,000 college students, Borgona et al. (2019) examined mental 
health differences among several gender groups, including those 
identifying as cisgender, transgender and gender nonconforming. 
Results indicated that participants who identified as transgender 
and gender nonconforming had significantly higher levels of anxiety 
and depression than those identifying as cisgender. Bargona et al. 
explained the higher rates of anxiety and depression using the 
minority stress model, which states that an unaccepting social 
environment results in both external and internal stress which 
contributes to poorer mental health. External stressors include 
discrimination, harassment, and prejudice, while internal stressors 
include negative thoughts, feelings, and emotions resulting from 
one’s identity. Bargona et al. recommend that mental health services 
that are sensitive to both gender minority and sexual minority 
status be available. 

The transgender children discussed in chapter 4 may, when they 
become an adult, alter their bodies through medical interventions, 
such as surgery and hormonal therapy so that their physical being 
is better aligned with gender identity. However, not all transgender 
individuals choose to alter their bodies or physically transition. 


Many will maintain their original anatomy but may present 
themselves to society as a different gender, often by adopting the 
dress, hairstyle, mannerisms, or other characteristics typically 
assigned to a certain gender. It is important to note that people who 
cross-dress or wear clothing that is traditionally assigned to the 
opposite gender, such as transvestites, drag kings, and drag queens, 
do not necessarily identify as transgender (though some do). People 
often confuse the term transvestite, which is the practice of dressing 
and acting in a style or manner traditionally associated with another 
sex (APA, 2013) with transgender. Cross-dressing is typically a form 
of self-expression, entertainment, or personal style, and not 
necessarily an expression about one’s gender identity. 

Sexuality 


Human sexuality refers to people’s sexual interest in and attraction 
to others, as well as their capacity to have erotic experiences and 
responses. Sexuality may be experienced and expressed in a variety 
of ways, including thoughts, fantasies, desires, beliefs, attitudes, 
values, behaviors, practices, roles, and relationships. These may 
manifest themselves in biological, physical, emotional, social, or 
spiritual aspects. The biological and physical aspects of sexuality 
largely concern the human reproductive functions, including the 
human sexual response cycle and the basic biological drive that 
exists in all species. Emotional aspects of sexuality include bonds 
between individuals that are expressed through profound feelings 
or physical manifestations of love, trust, and care. Social aspects 
deal with the effects of human society on one’s sexuality, while 
spirituality concerns an individual’s spiritual connection with others 
through sexuality. Sexuality also impacts and is impacted by 
cultural, political, legal, philosophical, moral, ethical, and religious 
aspects of life. 


The Sexual Response Cycle: Sexual motivation, often referred to aslibido, is a person’s overall sexual drive or desire for sexual activity.
This motivation is determined by biological, psychological, and 
social factors. In most mammalian species, sex hormones control 
the ability to engage in sexual behaviors. However, sex hormones do 
not directly regulate the ability to copulate in primates (including 
humans); rather, they are only one influence on the motivation 
to engage in sexual behaviors. Social factors, such as work and 
family, also have an impact, as do internal psychological factors like 
personality and stress. Sex drive may also be affected by hormones, 
medical conditions, medications, lifestyle stress, pregnancy, and 
relationship issues. 

The sexual response cycle is a model that describes the 
physiological responses that take place during sexual activity.
According to Kinsey, Pomeroy, and Martin (1948), the cycle consists 
of four phases: excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution. The 
excitement phase is the phase in which the intrinsic (inner) 
motivation to pursue sex arises. The plateau phase is the period 
of sexual excitement with increased heart rate and circulation that 
sets the stage for orgasm. Orgasm is the release of tension, and the 
resolution period is the unaroused state before the cycle begins again. 

The Brain and Sex: The brain is the structure that translates 
the nerve impulses from the skin into pleasurable sensations. It 
controls the nerves and muscles used during sexual behavior. The 
brain regulates the release of hormones, which are believed to be 
the physiological origin of sexual desire. The cerebral cortex, which 
is the outer layer of the brain that allows for thinking and reasoning, 
is believed to be the origin of sexual thoughts and fantasies. Beneath 
the cortex is the limbic system, which consists of the amygdala, 
hippocampus, cingulate gyrus, and septal area. These structures are 
where emotions and feelings are believed to originate, and they are 
important for sexual behavior. 

The hypothalamus is the most important part of the brain for 
sexual functioning. This is the small area at the base of the brain 
consisting of several groups of nerve-cell bodies that receives input 


from the limbic system. Studies with lab animals have shown that 
the destruction of certain areas of the hypothalamus causes the 
complete elimination of sexual behavior. One of the reasons for the 
importance of the hypothalamus is that it controls the pituitary 
gland, which secretes hormones that control the other glands of the 
body. 

Figure 7.13 

Hormones: Several important sexual hormones are secreted by the 
pituitary gland. Oxytocin, also known as the hormone of love, is 
released during sexual intercourse when an orgasm is achieved. 
Oxytocin is also released in females when they give birth or are 
breastfeeding; it is believed that oxytocin is involved with 
maintaining close relationships. Both prolactin and oxytocin 
stimulate milk production in females. Follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) is responsible for ovulation in females by triggering egg 
maturity; it also stimulates sperm production in males. Luteinizing 
hormone (LH) triggers the release of a mature egg in females during 
the process of ovulation. 
In males, testosterone appears to be a major 
contributing factor to sexual motivation. Vasopressin is involved 


in the male arousal phase, and the increase of vasopressin during 
erectile response may be directly associated with increased 
motivation to engage in sexual behavior. 

The relationship between hormones and female sexual motivation 
is not as well understood, largely due to the overemphasis on male 
sexuality in Western research. Estrogen and progesterone typically 
regulate motivation to engage in sexual behavior for females, with 
estrogen increasing motivation and progesterone decreasing it. The 
levels of these hormones rise and fall throughout a woman’s 
menstrual cycle. Research suggests that testosterone, oxytocin, and 
vasopressin are also implicated in female sexual motivation in 
similar ways as they are in males, but more research is needed to 
understand these relationships. 

Sexual Responsiveness Peak: Men and women tend to reach their 
peak of sexual responsiveness at different ages. For men, sexual 
responsiveness tends to peak in the late teens and early twenties. 
Sexual arousal can easily occur in response to physical stimulation 
or fantasizing. Sexual responsiveness begins a slow decline in the 
late twenties and into the thirties, although a man may continue to 
be sexually active. Through time, a man may require more intense 
stimulation in order to become aroused. Women often find that they 
become more sexually responsive throughout their 20s and 30s and 
may peak in the late 30s or early 40s. This is likely due to greater 
self-confidence and reduced inhibitions about sexuality. 

Sexually Transmitted Infections: Sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs), also referred to as sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) or 
venereal diseases (VDs) are illnesses that have a significant 
probability of transmission by means of sexual behavior, including 
vaginal intercourse, anal sex, and oral sex. Some STIs can also be 
contracted by sharing intravenous drug needles with an infected 
person, as well as through childbirth or breastfeeding. 


Common STIs include: 

chlamydia; 
herpes (HSV-1 and HSV-2); 
human papillomavirus (HPV); 
gonorrhea; 
syphilis; 
trichomoniasis; 
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and AIDS (acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome). 


According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
(2014), there was an increase in the three most common types of 
STDs in 2014. These include 1.4 million cases of chlamydia, 350,000 
cases of gonorrhea, and 20,000 cases of syphilis. Those most 
affected by STDS include those younger, gay/bisexual males, and 
females. The most effective way to prevent transmission of STIs 
is to practice safe sex and avoid direct contact of skin or fluids 
which can lead to transfer with an infected partner. Proper use of 
safe-sex supplies (such as male condoms, female condoms, gloves, 
or dental dams) reduces contact and risk and can be effective in 
limiting exposure; however, some disease transmission may occur 
even with these barriers. 

Societal Views on Sexuality: Society’s views on sexuality are 
influenced by everything from religion to philosophy, and they have 
changed throughout history and are continuously evolving. 
Historically, religion has been the greatest influence on sexual 
behavior in the United States; however, in more recent years, peers 
and the media have emerged as two of the strongest influences, 
particularly among American teens (Potard, Courtois, & Rusch, 
2008). 

Mass media in the form of television, magazines, movies, and 
music continues to shape what is deemed appropriate or normal 
sexuality, targeting everything from body image to products meant 


to enhance sex appeal. Media serves to perpetuate a number of 
social scripts about sexual relationships and the sexual roles of 
men and women, many of which have been shown to have both 
empowering and problematic effects on people’s (especially 
women’s) developing sexual identities and sexual attitudes. 

Cultural Differences: In the West, premarital sex is normative 
by the late teens, more than a decade before most people enter 
marriage. In the United States and Canada, and in northern and 
eastern Europe, cohabitation is also normative; most people have 
at least one cohabiting partnership before marriage. In southern 
Europe, cohabiting is still taboo, but premarital sex is tolerated 
in emerging adulthood. In contrast, both premarital sex and 
cohabitation remain rare and forbidden throughout Asia. Even 
dating is discouraged until the late twenties when it would be a 
prelude to a serious relationship leading to marriage. In cross-
cultural comparisons, about three-fourths of emerging adults in 
the United States and Europe report having had premarital sexual 
relations by age 20, versus less than one fifth in Japan and South 
Korea (Hatfield & Rapson, 2006). 

Sexual Orientation: A person’s sexual orientation is their emotional 
and sexual attraction to a particular gender. It is a personal quality 
that inclines people to feel romantic or sexual attraction (or a 
combination of these) to persons of a given sex or gender. According 
to the American Psychological Association (APA) (2016), sexual 
orientation also refers to a person’s sense of identity-based on those 
attractions, related behaviors, and membership in a community of 
others who share those attractions. Sexual orientation is 
independent of gender; for example, a transgender person may 
identify as heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, pansexual, 
polysexual, asexual, or any other kind of sexuality, just like a 
cisgender person. 

Sexual Orientation on a Continuum: Sexuality researcher Alfred 
Kinsey was among the first to conceptualize sexuality as a 
continuum rather than a strict dichotomy of gay or straight. To 


classify this continuum of heterosexuality and homosexuality, 
Kinsey et al. (1948) created a seven-point rating scale that ranged 
from exclusively heterosexual to exclusively homosexual. Research 
done over several decades has supported this idea that sexual 
orientation ranges along a continuum, from exclusive attraction to 
the opposite sex/gender to exclusive attraction to the same sex/
gender (Carroll, 2016). 

However, sexual orientation now can be defined in many ways. 
Heterosexuality, which is often referred to as being straight, is 
attraction to individuals of the opposite sex/gender, while 
homosexuality, being gay or lesbian, is attraction to individuals of 
one’s own sex/gender. Bisexuality was a term traditionally used to 


(Carroll, 2016). 
refer to attraction to individuals of either male or female sex, but it 
has recently been used in nonbinary models of sex and gender (i.e., 
models that do not assume there are only two sexes or two genders) 
to refer to attraction to any sex or gender. Alternative terms such as 
pansexuality and polysexuality have also been developed, referring 
to attraction to all sexes/genders and attraction to multiple sexes/
genders, respectively 

Asexuality refers to having no sexual attraction to any sex/gender. 
According to Bogaert (2015), about one percent of the population 
is asexual. Being asexual is not due to any physical problems, and 
the lack of interest in sex does not cause the individual any distress. 
Asexuality is being researched as a distinct sexual orientation. 

Development of Sexual Orientation: According to current scientific 
understanding, individuals are usually aware of their sexual 
orientation between middle childhood and early adolescence. 
However, this is not always the case, and some do not become aware 
of their sexual orientation until much later in life. It is not necessary 
to participate in sexual activity to be aware of these emotional, 
romantic, and physical attractions; people can be celibate and still 
recognize their sexual orientation. Some researchers argue that 
sexual orientation is not static and inborn but is instead fluid and 
changeable throughout the lifespan. 

There is no scientific consensus regarding the exact reasons why 
an individual holds a particular sexual orientation. Research has 
examined possible biological, developmental, social, and cultural 
influences on sexual orientation, but there has been no evidence 
that links sexual orientation to only one factor (APA, 2016). However, 
biological explanations, that include genetics, birth order, and 
hormones will be explored further as many scientists support 
biological processes occurring during the embryonic and early 
postnatal life as playing the main role in sexual orientation 
(Balthazart, 2018). 

Genetics: Using both twin and familial studies, heredity provides 
one biological explanation for same-sex orientation. Bailey and 


Pillard (1991) studied pairs of male twins and found that the 
concordance rate for identical twins was 52%, while the rate for 
fraternal twins was only 22%. Bailey, Pillard, Neale, and Agyei (1993) 
studied female twins and found a similar difference with a 
concordance rate of 48% for identical twins and 16% for fraternal 
twins. Schwartz, Kim, Kolundzija, Rieger, & Sanders (2010) found 
that gay men had more gay male relatives than straight men, and 
sisters of gay men were more likely to be lesbians than sisters of 
straight men. 

Fraternal Birth Order: The fraternal birth order effect indicates 
that the probability of a boy identifying as gay increases for each 
older brother born to the same mother (Balthazart, 2018; Blanchard, 
2001). According to Bogaret et al. “the increased incidence of 
homosexuality in males with older brothers results from a 
progressive immunization of the mother against a male-specific 
cell-adhesion protein that plays a key role in cell-cell interactions, 
specifically in the process of synapse formation,” (as cited in 
Balthazart, 2018, p. 234). A meta-analysis indicated that the fraternal 
birth order effect explains the sexual orientation of between 15% 
and 29% of gay men. 

Hormones: Excess or deficient exposure to hormones during 
prenatal development has also been theorized as an explanation 


for sexual orientation. One-third of females exposed to abnormal 
amounts of prenatal androgens, a condition called congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), identify as bisexual or lesbian (Cohen-
Bendahan, van de Beek, & Berenbaum, 2005). In contrast, too little 
exposure to prenatal androgens may affect male sexual orientation 
by not masculinizing the male brain (Carlson, 2011). 

Sexual Orientation Discrimination: The United States is 
heteronormative, meaning that society supports heterosexuality as 
the norm. Consider, for example, that homosexuals are often asked, 
“When did you know you were gay?” but heterosexuals are rarely 
asked, “When did you know you were straight?” (Ryle, 2011). Living 
in a culture that privileges heterosexuality has a significant impact 
on the ways in which non-heterosexual people are able to develop 
and express their sexuality. 

Open identification of one’s sexual orientation may be hindered 
by homophobia which encompasses a range of negative attitudes 
and feelings toward homosexuality or people who are identified or 
perceived as being lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT). It 
can be expressed as antipathy, contempt, prejudice, aversion, or 
hatred; it may be based on irrational fear and is sometimes related 
to religious beliefs (Carroll, 2016). Homophobia is observable in 
critical and hostile behavior, such as discrimination and violence 
on the basis of sexual orientations that are non- heterosexual. 
Recognized types of homophobia include institutionalized 
homophobia, such as religious and state-sponsored homophobia, and 
internalized homophobia in which people with same-sex attractions 
internalize, or believe, society’s negative views and/or hatred of 
themselves. 


Sexual minorities regularly experience stigma, harassment, 
discrimination, and violence based on their sexual orientation 
(Carroll, 2016). Research has shown that gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
teenagers are at a higher risk of depression and suicide due to 
exclusion from social groups, rejection from peers and family, and 
negative media portrayals of homosexuals (Bauermeister et al., 
2010). Discrimination can occur in the workplace, in housing, at 
schools, and in numerous public settings. Much of this 
discrimination is based on stereotypes and misinformation. Major 
policies to prevent discrimination based on sexual orientation have 
only come into effect in the United States in the last few years. 

The majority of empirical and clinical research on LGBT 
populations is done with largely white, middle-class, well-educated 
samples. This demographic limits our understanding of more 
marginalized sub-populations that are also affected by racism, 
classism, and other forms of oppression. In the United States, non-
Caucasian LGBT individuals may find themselves in a double 


minority, in which they are not fully accepted or understood by 
Caucasian LGBT communities and are also not accepted by their 
own ethnic group (Tye, 2006). Many people experience racism in the 
dominant LGBT community where racial stereotypes merge with 
gender stereotypes. 

References 

Allendorf, K. (2013). Schemas of marital change: From arranged 
marriages to eloping for love. Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 
453-469. 

Alterovitz, S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2011). Partner preferences across 
the life span: Online dating by older adults. Psychology of Popular 
Media Culture, 1(S), 89-95. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (Fifth Edition). Washington, D. C.: 
Author. 

American Psychological Association. (2016). Sexual orientation and 
homosexuality. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/topics/lgbt/
orientation.aspx 

Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of development 
from late teens through the twenties. American Psychologist, 55, 
469-480. 

Arnett, J. J. (2001). Conceptions of the transitions to adulthood: 
Perspectives from adolescence to midlife. Journal of Adult 
Development, 8, 133-143. 

Arnett, J. J. (2003). Conceptions of the transition to adulthood 
among emerging adults in American ethnic groups. New 
Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 100, 63–75. 

Arnett, J. J. (2004). Conceptions of the transition to adulthood 
among emerging adults in American ethnic groups. In J. J. Arnett 
& N. Galambos (Eds.), Cultural conceptions of the transition to 


adulthood: New directions in child and adolescent development. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Arnett, J. J. (2006). G. Stanley Hall’s adolescence: Brilliance and non-
sense. History of Psychology, 9, 186-197. Arnett, J.J. (2007). The 
long and leisurely route: Coming of age in Europe today. Current 
History, 106, 130-136. 

Arnett, J. J. (2011). Emerging adulthood(s): The cultural psychology 
of a new life stage. In L.A. Jensen (Ed.), Bridging cultural and 
developmental psychology: New syntheses in theory, research, and 
policy (pp. 255–275). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Arnett, J. J. (2016). Does emerging adulthood theory apply across 
social classes? National data on a persistent question. Emerging 
Adulthood, 4(4), 227-235. 

Arnett, J. J., & Taber, S. (1994). Adolescence terminable and 
interminable: When does adolescence end? Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 23, 517–537. 

Aquilino, W. S. (2006). Family relationships and support systems in 
emerging adulthood. In J. J. Arnett & J. L. Tanner (Eds.), Emerging 
adults in America: Coming of age in the 21st century (pp. 193-217). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Babcock, L., Gelfand, M., Small, D., & Stayn, H. (2006). Gender 
differences in the propensity to initiate negotiations. In D. De 
Cremer, M. Zelenberg, & J.K. Muringham (Eds.), Social psychology 
and economics (pp. 239-262). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B. (2008). Becoming friends 
by chance. Psychological Science, 19(5), 439–440. Bailey, J. M., & 
Pillard, R. C. (1991). A genetic study of male sexual orientation. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1089-1096. 

Bailey, J. M., Pillard, R. C., Neale, M. C. & Agyei, Y. (1993). Heritable 
factors influence sexual orientation in women. Archives of General 
Psychology, 50, 217-223. 

Baldridge, D.C., Eddleston, K.A., & Vega, J.F. (2006). Saying no to 
being uprooted: The impact of family and gender on willingness to 
relocate. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 
79, 131-149. 


Balthazart, J. (2018). Fraternal birth order effect on sexual 
orientation explained. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 115(2), 234-236. 

Bartholomew, K. (1990). Avoidance of intimacy: An attachment 
perspective. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 7, 147-178. 
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3524.61.2.226. 

Basseches, M. (1984). Dialectical thinking and adult development. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Pub. 

Bauermeister, J. A., Johns, M. M., Sandfort, T. G., Eisenberg, A., 
Grossman, A. H., & D’Augelli, A. R. (2010). Relationship trajectories 
and psychological well-being among sexual minority youth. 
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 39(10), 1148-1163. 

Belsky, J. (1984). The determinants of parenting: A process model. 
Child Development, 55, 83–96. 

Benokraitis, N. V. (2005). Marriages and families: Changes, choices, 
and constraints (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. 

Berger, K. S. (2005). The developing person through the life span (6th 
ed.). New York: Worth. 

Bisson, M. A., & Levine, T. R. (2009). Negotiating a friends with 
benefits relationship. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 66–73. 
doi:10.1007/s10508-007-9211-2 

Blanchard, R. (2001). Fraternal birth order and the maternal immune 
hypothesis of male homosexuality. Hormones and Behavior, 40, 
105-114. 

Blau, F. D., Ferber, M. A., & Winkler, A. E. (2010). The economics of 
women, men and work. (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Prentice Hall. 

Bogaert, A. F. (2015). Asexuality: What it is and why it matters. 
Journal of Sex Research, 52(4), 362-379. doi:10.1080/
00224499.2015.1015713 

Bogle, K. A. (2007). The shift from dating to hooking up in college: 
What scholars have missed. Sociology Compass, 1/2, 775– 788. 

Bogle, K. A. (2008). Hooking up: Sex, dating, and relationships on 
campus. New York, NY: New York University Press. 

Bohlin, G., & Hagekull, B. (2009). Socio-emotional development from 


infancy to young adulthood. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 
50, 592-601. 

Borgogna, N. C., McDermott, R. C., Aita, S. L., & Kridel, M. M. (2019). 
Anxiety and depression across gender and sexual minorities: 
Implications for transgender, gender nonconforming, pansexual, 
demisexual, asexual, queer and questioning individuals. 
Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity, 6(1), 54-63. 

Bosson, J. K., Vandello, J., & Buckner, C. (2019). The psychology of sex 
and gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Boundless. (2016). Physical development in adulthood. Boundles 
Psychology. Retrieved from https://www.boundless.com/
psychology/textbooks/boundless-psychology-textbook/
human-development-14/early-and- middle-adulthood-74/
physical-development-in-adulthood-287-12822/ 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1989). Ecological systems theory. In R. Vasta 
(Ed.), Annals of Child Development, Vol. 6 (pp. 187–251). Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press. 

Brooks-Gunn, J., & Lewis, M. (1981). Infant social perception: 
Responses to pictures of parents and strangers. Developmental 
Psychology, 17(5), 647–649. 

Brown, A. (2019). Couples who meet online are more diverse than 
those who meet in other ways, largely because they’re younger. Pew 
Research Center. Retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2019/06/24/couples-who-meet-online-are-more-
diverse-than-those-who-meet-in-other-ways-largely-because-
theyre-younger/ 

Bruckmuller, S., Ryan, M.K., Floor, R., & Haslam, S.A. (2014). The 
glass cliff: Examining why women occupy leadership positions in 
precarious circumstances. In S. Kumra, R. Simpson, & R.J. Burke 
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of gender in organizations (pp. 314-331). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Bryant, K. & Sheldon, P. (2017). Cyber dating in the age of mobile 
apps: Understanding motives, attitudes, and characteristics of 
users. American Communication Journal, 19(2), 1-15. 

Bumpass, L. L. (1990). What’s happening to the family? Interactions 


between demographic and institutional change. Demography, 
27(4), 483–498. 

Butzer, B., & Campbell, L. (2008). Adult attachment, sexual 
satisfaction, and relationship satisfaction: A study of married 
couples. Personal Relationships, 15, 141-154. 

Cain, S. (2012). Quiet. New York: Crown Publishing Group. 

Campbell, L., Simpson, J. A., Boldry, J., & Kashy, D. A. (2005). 
Perceptions of conflict and support in romantic relationships: 
The role of attachment anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88, 510-532. 

Carlson, N. R. (2011). Foundations of behavioral neuroscience (8th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson Education. 

Carroll, J. L. (2007). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (2nd ed.). 
Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning. 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Ceci, S. J., & Williams, W. M. (2011). Understanding current causes 
of women’s under-representation in science. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science of the United States of America, 108(8), 
3157-3162. doi:10.1073/pnas.1014871108 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2014). Reported STDs 
in the United States. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/std/
stats14/std-trends-508.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015a). Births and 
natality. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
births.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015b). Obesity and 
overweight. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
obesity-overweight.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). Adult obesity 
causes and consequences. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/
obesity/adult/causes.html 

Channick, R. (2019, July 9). Putting gender pay gap onto a broader 
stage. The Chicago Tribune, pp. 1-2. 


Chappell, K. D., & Davis, K. E. (1998). Attachment, partner choice, 
and perception of romantic partners: An experimental test of 
the attachment-security hypothesis. Personal Relationships, 5, 
327–342. 

Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1987). Origins and evolution of behavior 
disorders. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Chopik, W. J., Edelstein, R. S., & Fraley, R. C. (2013). From the cradle 
to the grave: Age differences in attachment from early adulthood 
to old age. Journal or Personality, 81 (2), 171-183 DOI: 10.1111/j. 
1467-6494.2012.00793 

Cicirelli, V. (2009). Sibling relationships, later life. In D. Carr (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of the life course and human development. Boston, 
MA: Cengage. 

Clark, L. A., Kochanska, G., & Ready, R. (2000). Mothers’ personality 
and its interaction with child temperament as predictors of 
parenting behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
79, 274–285. 

Clark, L. A. & Watson, D. (1999). Temperament: A new paradigm 
for trait theory. In L.A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of 
personality. NY: Guilford. 

Clarke, L., & Nichols, J. (1972). I have more fun with you than anybody.
New York, NY: St. Martin’s. 

Cohen, P. (2013). Marriage is declining globally. Can you say that?
Retrieved from https://familyinequality.wordpress.com/2013/
06/12/marriage-is-declining/ 

Cohen-Bendehan, C. C., van de Beek, C. & Berenbaum, S. A. (2005). 
Prenatal sex hormone effects on child and adult sex-typed 
behavior: Methods and findings. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 47, 230-237. 

Cohn, D. (2013). In Canada, most babies now born to women 30 and 
older. Pew Research Center. 

Conger, R. D., & Conger, K. J. (2002). Resilience in Midwestern 
families: Selected findings from the first decade of a prospective 
longitudinal study. Journal of Marriage and Family, 64, 361–373. 

Copen, C.E., Daniels, K., & Mosher, W.D. (2013) First premarital 


cohabitation in the United States: 2006–2010 National Survey of 
Family Growth. National health statistics reports; no 64. 
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 

Council of Economic Advisors. (2015). Gender pay gap: Recent trends 
and explanations. Retrieved from https://www.whitehouse.gov/
sites/default/files/docs/equal_pay_issue_brief_final.pdf 

Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Tenenbaum, H. R., & Allen, E. (2001). 
Parents explain more often to boys than to girls during shared 
scientific thinking. Psychological Science, 12, 258–261. 

Davidson, R. J. & Begley, S. (2012). The emotional life of your brain. 
New York: Penguin. 

Davis, J. L., & Rusbult, C. E. (2001). Attitude alignment in close 
relationships. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 81(1), 
65–84. 

Demick, J. (1999). Parental development: Problem, theory, method, 
and practice. In R. L. Mosher, D. J. Youngman, & J. M. Day (Eds.), 
Human development across the life span: Educational and 
psychological applications (pp. 177–199). Westport, CT: Praeger. 

Desai, S., & Andrist, L. (2010). Gender scripts and age at marriage in 
India. Demography, 47, 667-687. doi:10.1353/dem.0.0118 Desilver, 
D. (2016) Millions of young people in the US and EU are neither 
working nor learning. Pew Research Center (January 28, 2016). 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/01/28/us-eu-
neet-population/ 

Diamond, M. (2002). Sex and gender are different: Sexual identity 
and gender identity are different. Clinical Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 7(3), 320-334. 

Douglass, C. B. (2007). From duty to desire: Emerging adulthood in 
Europe and its consequences. Child Development Perspectives, 1, 
101–108. 

Driver, J., & Gottman, J. (2004). Daily marital interactions and 
positive affect during marital conflict among newlywed couples. 
Family Process, 43, 301–314. 

Dunn, J. (1984). Sibling studies and the developmental impact of 


critical incidents. In P.B. Baltes & O.G. Brim (Eds.), Life-span 
development and behavior (Vol 6). Orlando, FL: Academic Press. 

Dunn, J. (2007). Siblings and socialization. In J. E. Grusec & P. D. 
Hastings (Eds.), Handbook of socialization. New York: Guilford. 

Dye, J. L. (2010). Fertility of American women: 2008. Current 
Population Reports. Retrieved from www.census.gov/prod/
2010pubs/p20-563.pdf. 

Ebrahimi, L., Amiri, M., Mohamadlou, M., & Rezapur, R. (2017). 
Attachment stules, parenting styles, and depression. International 
Journal of Mental Health, 15, 1064-1068. 

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Shepard, S. A., Guthrie, I.K., Murphy, 
B.C., & Reiser, M. (1999). Parental reactions to children’s negative 
emotions: Longitudinal relations to quality of children’s social 
functioning. Child Development, 70, 513-534. 

Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Spinrad, T., Gershoff, E., Valiente, C., 
Losoya, S. L., Zhou, Q., Cumberland, A., Liew, J., Reiser, M., & 
Maxon, E. (2008). Understanding parent-adolescent conflict 
discussions: Concurrent and across-time prediction from youths’ 
dispositions and parenting. Monographs of the Society for Research 
in Child Development, 73, (Serial No. 290, No. 2), 1-160. 

Erikson, E. H. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton. 
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton. 

Finkel, E. J., Burnette J. L., & Scissors L. E. (2007). Vengefully ever 
after: Destiny beliefs, state attachment anxiety, and forgiveness. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 871–886. 

Fraley, R. C. (2013). Attachment through the life course. In R. Biswas-
Diener & E. Diener (Eds), Noba textbook series: Psychology. 
Champaign, IL: DEF publishers. Retrieved from nobaproject.com. 

Fraley, R. C., Hudson, N. W., Heffernan, M. E., & Segal, N. (2015). Are 
adult attachment styles categorical or dimensional? A taxometric 
analysis of general and relationship-specific attachment 
orientations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 109 (2),
354-368. 

Fraley, R. C., Roisman, G. I., Booth-LaForce, C., Owen, M. T., & 
Holland, A. S. (2013). Interpersonal and genetic origins of adult 


attachment styles: A longitudinal study from infancy to early 
adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 
8817-838. 

Frazier, P. A, Byer, A. L., Fischer, A. R., Wright, D. M., & DeBord, K. 
A. (1996). Adult attachment style and partner choice: Correlational 
and experimental findings. Personal Relationships, 3, 117–136. 

Freitas, A. L., Azizian, A., Travers, S., & Berry, S. A. (2005). The 
evaluative connotation of processing fluency: Inherently positive 
or moderated by motivational context? Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 41(6), 636–644. 

Frieden, T. (2011, January 14). Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
for the Centers for Disease Control (United States, Center for 
Disease Control). Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/su6001al.htm?s_su6001al_w 

Friedman, H. S., Tucker, J. S., Tomlinson-Keasey, C., Schwartz, J. E., 
Wingard, D. L., & Criqui, M. H. (1993). Does childhood personality 
predict longevity? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 
176–185. doi:10.1037/0022- 3514.65.1.176 

Fry, R. (2016). For the first time in the modern era, living with parents 
edges out other living arrangements for 18- to 34- year-olds.
Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center. 

Fry, R. (2018). Millennials are the largest generation in the U. S. labor 
force. Retrieved from: https://www.pewresearch.org/fact- tank/
2018/04/11/millennials-largest-generation-us-labor-force/ 

Fryar, C. D., Carroll, M. D., & Ogden, C. L. (2014). Prevalence of 
overweight, obesity, and extreme obesity among adults: United 
States, 1960-1962 through 2011-2012. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_adult_11_12/
obesity_adult_11_12.htm 

Gallup Poll Report (2016). What millennials want from work and 
life. Business Journal. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/
businessjournal/191435/millennials-work-life.aspx 

Garcia, J. R., & Reiber, C. (2008). Hook-up behavior: A 
biopsychosocial perspective. The Journal of Social, Evolutionary, 
and Cultural Psychology, 2, 192–208. 


Garcia, J. R., Reiber, C., Massey, S. G., & Merriwether, A. M. (2012). 
Sexual hookup culture: A review. Review of General Psychology, 
16(2), 161-176. doi:10.1037/a0027911 

Gates, G. J. (2011). How many people are lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender? Retrieved from 
http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/research/census-lgbt-
demographics-studies/how-many-people-are-lesbian-gay- 
bisexual-and-transgender/ 

Gonzales, N. A., Coxe, S., Roosa, M. W., White, R. M. B., Knight, 
G. P., Zeiders, K. H., & Saenz, D. (2011). Economic hardship, 
neighborhood context, and parenting: Prospective effects on 
Mexican-American adolescent’s mental health. American Journal 
of Community Psychology, 47, 98–113. doi: 10.1007/
s10464-010-9366-1 

Gottman, J. M. (1999). Couple’s handbook: Marriage Survival Kit 
Couple’s Workshop. Seattle, WA: Gottman Institute. 

Gottman, J. M., Carrere, S., Buehlman, K. T., Coan, J. A., & Ruckstuhl, 
L. (2000). Predicting marital stability and divorce in newlywed 
couples. Journal of Family Psychology, 14(1), 42-58. 

Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital processes 
predictive of later dissolution: Behavior, physiology and health. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 221–233. 

Grello, C. M., Welsh, D. P., Harper, M. S., & Dickson, J. W. (2003). 
Dating and sexual relationship trajectories and adolescent 
functioning. Adolescent & Family Health, 3, 103–112. 

Grusec, J. E., Goodnow, J. J., & Cohen, L. (1996). Household work and 
the development of concern for others. Developmental Psychology, 
32, 999–1007. 

Gurrentz, B. (2018). For young adults, cohabitation is up, and 
marriage is down. US. Census Bureau. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2018/11/cohabitaiton-
is-up-marriage-is-down-for-young-adults.html. 

Gwinnell, E. (1998). Online seductions: Falling in love with strangers 
on the Internet. New York: Johnson Publishing. 

Hales, C.M., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Ogden, C.L. (2017). 


Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: United States, 
2015–2016. NCHS data brief, no 288. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics. 

Hamilton, B. E., Martin, J. A., & Ventura, S. J. (2011). Births: 
Preliminary data for 2010. National Vital Statistics Reports, 60(2). 

Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Harmon-Jones, E., & Allen, J. J. B. (2001). The role of affect in the 
mere exposure effect: Evidence from psychophysiological and 
individual differences approaches. Personality & Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 27(7), 889–898. 

Harvard Health Letter. (2012). Raising your conscientiousness. 
Retrieved from http://www.helath.harvard.edu 

Hatfield, E., & Rapson, R. L. (2006). Love and sex: Cross-cultural 
perspectives. New York, NY: University Press of America. 

Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an 
attachment process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
52 (3), 511-524. 

Hegewisch, A., & Ellis, E. (2015). The gender wage gap by occupation 
2014 and by race and ethnicity. Washington DC: Institute for 
Women’s Policy Research. Retrieved from http://www.iwpr.org/
publications/pubs/the-gender-wage-gap-by- 
occupation-2014-and-by-race-and-ethnicity. 

Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. S. (Eds.). (2000). Close relationships: A 
sourcebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Heron, M. P., & Smith, B. L. (2007). Products – Health E Stats – 
Homepage. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved 
from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/hestats/
leadingdeath03/leadingdeath03.htm 

Hess, A. (2019). Today is the Women’s World Cup final between the US 
and Netherlands—here’s how much money is on the line. Retrieved 
from https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/04/womens-world-cup-
final-how-much-money-is-on-the- line.html 

Holland, A. S., Fraley, R. C., & Roisman, G. I. (2012). Attachment 
styles in dating couples: Predicting relationship functioning over 


time. Personal Relationships, 19, 234-246. doi: 10.1111/
j.1475-6811.2011.01350.x 

Hudson, N. W., Fraley, R. C., Vicary, A. M., & Brumbaugh, C. C. (2012). 
Attachment coregulation: A longitudinal investigation of the 
coordination in romantic partners’ attachment styles. Manuscript 
under review. 

Hyde, J. S., Bigler, R., Joel, D., Tate, C., & van Anders, S. (2019). The 
future of sex and gender in psychology: Five challenges to the 
gender binary. American Psychologist, 74(2), 171-193. 

Hyde, J. S., Else-Quest, N. M., & Goldsmith, H. H. (2004). Children’s 
temperament and behavior problems predict their employed 
mothers’ work functioning. Child Development, 75, 580–594. 

Institute for College Access & Success. (2018). Student debt and the 
class of 2017. Retrieved from https://ticas.org/posd/home. 

Janicki, D., Kamarck, T., Shiffman, S., & Gwaltney, C. (2006). 
Application of ecological momentary assessment to the study of 
marital adjustment and social interactions during daily life. 
Journal of Family Psychology, 20, 168–172. 

John, O. P., Naumann, L. P., & Soto, C. J. (2008). Paradigm shift to the 
integrative Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and 
conceptual issues. In O. P. John, R. R. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), 
Handbook of personality. Theory and research (3rd ed., pp. 114–158). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press. 301 

John, O. P., Robins, R. W., & Pervin, L. A. (2008). Handbook of 
personality. Theory and research (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press. 

Kagan, J. (2002). Behavioral inhibition as a temperamental category. 
In R.J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer, & H. H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook 
of affective sciences. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Kerr, D. C. R., Capaldi, D. M., Pears, K. C., & Owen, L. D. (2009). 
A prospective three generational study of fathers’ constructive 
parenting: Influences from family of origin, adolescent 
adjustment, and offspring temperament. Developmental 
Psychology, 45, 1257–1275. 


Kiff, C. J., Lengua, L. J., & Zalewski, M. (2011). Nature and nurturing: 
Parenting in the context of child temperament. Clinical Child 
and Family Psychology Review, 14, 251–301. doi: 10.1007/
s10567011-0093-4 

Kinsey, A., Pomeroy, W.B., & Martin, C. E. (1948). Sexual behavior in 
the human male. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders. Krebs, C., Lindquist, 
C., Warner, T., Fisher, B., & Martin, S. (2009). College women’s 
experiences with physically forced, alcohol or other drug-
enabled, and drug-facilitated sexual assault before and since 
entering college. Journal of American College Health, 57(6), 
639-649. 

Kreighbaum, A. (2019). Six figures in debt for a master’s degree. 
Retrieved from https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2019/
06/03/updated-college-scorecard-puts-spotlight-graduate-
student- borrowing 

Laursen, B., & Jensen-Campbell, L. A. (1999). The nature and 
functions of social exchange in adolescent romantic relationships. 
In W. Furman, B. B. Brown, & C. Feiring (Eds.), The development 
of romantic relationships in adolescence (pp. 50– 74). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Lesthaeghe, R. J., & Surkyn, J. (1988). Cultural dynamics and 
economic theories of fertility change. Population and 
Development Review 14(1), 1–45. 

Lucas, R. E. & Donnellan, A. B. (2011). Personality development across 
the life span: Longitudinal analyses with a national sample from 
Germany. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 847–861 

Madden, M. & Lenhart, A. (2006). Americans who are seeking 
romance use the Internet to help them in their search, but there 
is still widespread public concern about safety of online dating. 
Pew/Internet and American Life Project. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2006/OnlineDating.aspx 

Mandel, H. (2013). Up the down staircase: Women’s upward mobility 
and the wage penalty for occupational feminization, 1970- 2007. 
Social Forces, 91, 1183-1207. 

Manning, W. S., Giordano, P. C., & Longmore, M. A. (2006). Hooking 


up: The relationship contexts of “nonrelationship” sex. Journal of 
Adolescent Research, 21, 459–483. doi:10.1177/0743558406291692 

Martinez, G., Daniels, K., & Chandra, A. (2012). Fertility of men and 
women aged 15-44 years in the United States: National Survey 
of Family Growth, 2006-2010. National Health Statistics Reports, 
51(April). Hyattsville, MD: U.S., Department of Health and Human 
Services. 

McClure, M. J., Lydon., J. E., Baccus, J., & Baldwin, M. W. (2010). 
A signal detection analysis of the anxiously attached at speed-
dating: Being unpopular is only the first part of the problem. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 1024–1036. 

Menkin, J. A., Robles, T. F., Wiley, J. F., & Gonzaga, G. C. (2015). Online 
dating across the life span: Users’ relationship goals. Psychology 
and Aging, 30(4), 987-993. 

Mita, T. H., Dermer, M., & Knight, J. (1977). Reversed facial images 
and the mere-exposure hypothesis. Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology, 35(8), 597–601. 

National Center for Transgender Equality. (2015). National 
transgender discrimination survey. Retrieved from 
http://www.transequality.org/issues/national-transgender-
discrimination-survey 

National Conference of State Legislatures. (2017, June). Cyberbullies 
go catfishing. State Legislatures, 8. 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2015). College 
Drinking. Retrieved from http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/
publications/CollegeFactSheet/CollegeFact.htm 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2016). Alcohol 
facts and statistics. Retrieved from http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/
publications/AlcoholFacts&Stats/AlcoholFacts&Stats.htm 

National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2015). College-age and young 
adults. Retrieved from https://www.drugabuse.gov/related- 
topics/college-age-young-adults/college-addiction-studies-
programs 

National Institute of Drug Abuse. (2018). College-age and young 


adults. Retrieved from https://www.drugabuse.gov/related- 
topics/college-age-young-adults 

NCHEMS. (2016a). Percent of adults 18 to 24 with a high school 
diploma. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/?level=nation&mode=graph&state=0&submeasure=344 

NCHEMS. (2016b). Percent of adults 18 to 24 who are attending 
college. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems. Retrieved from: http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/
index.php?submeasure=331&year=2009&level=nation&mode=graph&state=0 

NCHEMS. (2016c). Percent of adults 25 to 49 who are attending 
college. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems. Retrieved from: http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/
index.php?submeasure=332&year=2009&level=nation&mode=graph&state=0 

NCHEMS. (2016d). Percent who earn a Bachelor’s degree within 6 
years. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems. Retrieved from http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/?level=nation&mode=graph&state=0&submeasure=27 

Nelson, L. J., Badger, S., & Wu, B. (2004). The influence of culture 
in emerging adulthood: Perspectives of Chinese college students. 
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 28, 26–36. 

Noland, M., Moran, T., & Kotschwar, B. (2016). Is gender diversity 
profitable? Evidence from a global survey. Washington, DC: 
Peterson Institute for International Economics. Retrieved from 
https://www.piie.com/publications/working-papers/gender- 
diversity-profitable-evidence-global-survey. 

OECD. (2014). Education at a Glance 2014: United States, OECD 
Publishing. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/unitedstates/
United%20States-EAG2014-Country-Note.pdf 

OECD. (2015). Education at a Glance 2015: OECD Indicators, OECD 


Publishing. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/
eag-2015-en 

Office of Adolescent Health. (2019). Prevalence of adolescent opioid 
misuse. Retrieved from https://www.hhs.gov/ash/oah/
adolescent-development/substance-use/drugs/opioids/
index.html#prevalence 

Oliver, M. B., & Hyde, J. S. (1993). Gender differences in sexuality: 
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 29–51. doi:10.1037/
0033-2909.114.1.29 

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2019). 
Youth on in employment, education, or training data. Retrieved 
from https://data.oecd.org/youthinac/youth-not-in-
employment-education-or-training-neet.htm 

Owen, J., & Fincham, F. D. (2011). Young adults’ emotional reactions 
after hooking up encounters. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40,321–330. doi:10.1007/s10508-010-9652-x 

Pascarella, E.T. (2006). How college effects students: Ten directions 
for future research. Journal of College Student Development, 47, 
508-520. 

Patton, W. & McMahon, M. (1999). Career development and systems 
theory: A new relationship. Brooks Cole Publishers. Peterson, A. 
(2019, July 9). Women’s World Cup. Changes could go global. The 
Chicago Tribune, p. 5. 

Pew Research Center. (2019). Same-sex marriage around the world. 
Retrieved from https://www.pewforum.org/fact-sheet/gay- 
marriage-around-the-world/ 

Phinney, J. S. & Baldelomar, O. A. (2011). Identity development in 
multiple cultural contexts. In L. A. Jensen (Ed.), Bridging cultural 
and developmental psychology: New syntheses in theory, research 
and policy (pp. 161-186). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Potard, C., Courtois, R., & Rusch, E. (2008). The influences of peers 
on risky behavior during adolescence. European Journal of 
Contraception and Reproductive Health Care, 13(30, 264-270. 

Prinzie, P., Stams, G. J., Dekovic, M., Reijntjes, A. H., & Belsky, J. 
(2009). The relations between parents’ Big Five personality factors 


and parenting: A meta-review. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 97, 351–362. 

Rankin, L. A. & Kenyon, D. B. (2008). Demarcating role transitions 
as indicators of adulthood in the 21st century. Who are they? 
Journal of Adult Development, 15(2), 87-92. doi: 10.1007/
s10804-007-9035-2 

Reis, H. T., & Aron, A. (2008). Love: What is it, why does it matter, and 
how does it operate? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3(1), 
80–86. 

Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N., Shiner, R., N., Caspi, A., & Goldberg, L. 
R. (2007). The power of personality: The comparative validity of 
personality traits, socioeconomic status, and cognitive ability for 
predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 2(4), 313–345. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00047. 

Roberts, B. W., & Mroczek, D. K. (2008). Personality trait change in 
adulthood. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 31–35. 

Rosenberger, N. (2007). Rethinking emerging adulthood in Japan: 
Perspectives from long-term single women. Child Development 
Perspectives, 1, 92–95. 

Rottinghaus, P. J., Coon, K. L., Gaffey, A. R., & Zytowski, D. G. (2007). 
Thirty-year stability and predictive validity of vocational interests. 
Journal of Career Assessment, 15 (1), 5-23. 

Rudman, L. A. (1998). Self-promotion as a risk factor for women: 
The costs and benefits of counterstereotypical impression 
management. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(3), 
629-645. 

Ryan, C. L. & Bauman, K. (March 2016). Educational Attainment in 
the United States: 2015. U.S. Department of Commerce Economics 
and Statistics Administration. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/
publications/2016/demo/p20-578.pdf 

Ryle, R. (2011). Questioning gender. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publishing. 

Schindler, I., Fagundes, C. P., & Murdock, K. W. (2010). Predictors 
of romantic relationship formation: Attachment style, prior 
relationships, and dating goals. Personal Relationships, 17, 97-105. 


Schmitt, D. P., Alcalay, L., Allik, J., Ault, L., Austers, I., Bennett, K. L., 
. . . Zupane`ie`, A. (2003). Universal sex differences in the desire 
for sexual variety: Tests from 52 nations, 6 continents, and 13 
islands. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 85–104. 
doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.85.1.85 

Schwartz, G., Kim, R., Kolundzija, A., Rieger, G., & Sanders, A. (2010). 
Biodemographic and physical correlates of sexual orientation in 
men. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 93-109. 

Simpson, J. A., Collins, W. A., Tran, S., & Haydon, K. C. (2007). 
Attachment and the experience and expression of emotions in 
adult romantic relationships: A developmental perspective. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 355–367. 

Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., Oriña, M. M., & Grich, J. (2002). Working 
models of attachment, support giving, and support seeking in a 
stressful situation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 
598-608. 

Sinnott, J. D. (1998). The development of logic in adulthood. NY: 
Plenum Press. 

Smith, A., & Anderson, M. (2016). 5 facts about online dating. Pew 
Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2016/02/29/5-facts-about-online-dating 

Smith, S., Zhang, X., Basile, K., Merrick, M., Wang, J., Kresnow, M., 
& Chen, J. (2018). National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence 
Survey, United States, 2015. Retrieved from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/2015data- 
brief508.pdf 

Society for the Study of Emerging Adulthood (SSEA). (2016). 
Overview. Retrieved from http://ssea.org/about/index.htm 

Sternberg, R. (1988). A triangular theory of love. New York: Basic. 

Super, D. E. (1980). A life-span life-space approach to career 
development. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 13, 282-298. Tamis-
LeMonda, C. S., Way, N., Hughes, D., Yoshikawa, H., Kalman, R. 
K., & Niwa, E. Y. (2008). Parents’ goals for children: The dynamic 
coexistence of individualism and collectivism in cultures and 


individuals. Social Development, 17, 183– 209. doi:10.1111/
j.1467.9507.2007.00419.x 

Tannen, D. (1990). You just don’t understand: Women and men in 
conversation. New York: Morrow. 

Thornton, A. (2005). Reading history sideways: The fallacy and 
enduring impact of the developmental paradigm on family life. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

TICAS. (2015). Student debt and the class of 2014, The Institute for 
College Access & Success. Retrieved from http://ticas.org/sites/
default/files/pub_files/classof2014.pdf 

Tye, M. H. (2006). Social inequality and well-being: Race-related 
stress, self-esteem, and life satisfaction among African American 
gay and bisexual men. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section 
B, 67(4-B), 0419-4217. 

UNdata (2010). Gross enrollment ratio in tertiary education. United 
Nations Statistics Division. Retrieved November 5, 2010, from 
http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?d=GenderStat&f=inID:68 

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2011). Human 
development report. NY: Oxford University Press. 

Untied, A., Orchowski, L., Mastroleo, N., & Gidycz, C. (2012). College 
students’ social reactions to the victim in a hypothetical sexual 
assault scenario: The role of victim and perpetrator alcohol use. 
Violence and Victims, 27(6), 957-972. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). Educational attainment in the United 
States: 2018. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/data/
tables/2018/demo/education-attainment/cps-detailed-
tables.html 

Violence Policy Center. (2018). More than 1,800 women murdered by 
men in one year, new study finds. Retrieved from http://vpc.org/
press/more-than-1800-women-murdered-by-men-in-one-
year-new-study-finds/ 

Volko, N. D. (2004, September 19). Exploring the Whys of Adolescent 
Drug Use. (United States, National Institute on Drug Abuse). 
Retrieved from http://www.drugabuse.gov/NIDA_notes/
NNvol19N3/DirRepVol19N3.html 


Wang, W., & Parker, K. (2014). Record share of Americans have never 
married: As values, economics and gender patterns change. 
Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2014/09/
2014-09-24_Never- Married-Americans.pdf 

Wang, W., & Taylor, P. (2011). For Millennials, parenthood trumps 
marriage. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 

Welsh, D. P., Grello, C. M., & Harper, M. S. (2006). No strings 
attached: The nature of casual sex in college students. Journal of 
Sex Research, 43, 255–267. doi:10.1080/00224490609552324 

Wighton, K. (2016). World’s obese population hits 640 million, 
according to largest ever study. Imperial College. Retrieved from 
http://www3.imperial.ac.uh/newsandeventspggrp/
imperialcollege/newssummary/news_311-3-2016-22-34-39 

Williams, L., Kabamalan, M., & Ogena, N. (2007). Cohabitation in the 
Philippines: Attitudes and behaviors among young women and 
men. Journal of Marriage and Family, 69(5), 1244–1256. 

Witt, J. (2009). SOC. New York: McGraw Hill. 

World Economic Forum. (2017). Global Gender Gap Report 2017. 
Retrieved from: http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-
report-2017/key-findings/ 

Yu, J., & Xie, Y. (2015). Cohabitation in China: Trends and 
determinants. Population & Development Review, 41 (4), 607-628. 

Zebrowitz, L. A., Bronstad, P. M., & Lee, H. K. (2007). The 
contribution of face familiarity to ingroup favoritism and 
stereotyping. Social Cognition, 25(2), 306–338. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 7 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 


Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 23: Cognitive 
Development in Early 
Adulthood 

Chapter 23 Learning Objectives 

Distinguish between formal and post formal 
thought 
Describe dialectical thought 
Describe the changes in educational attainment 
and the costs of education 
Describe the benefits of education beyond high 
school 
Describe the stages in career development, 
millennial employment, and NEETS 
Describe sexism and how it affects pay, hiring, 
employment, and education 



Beyond Formal Operational Thought: Postformal 
Thought 


As mentioned in chapter 6, according to Piaget’s theory adolescents 
acquire formal operational thought. The hallmark of this type of 
thinking is the ability to think abstractly or to consider possibilities 
and ideas about circumstances never directly experienced. Thinking 
abstractly is only one characteristic of adult thought, however. If 
you compare a 15-year-old with someone in their late 30s, you 
would probably find that the latter considers not only what is 
possible, but also what is likely. Why the change? The adult has 
gained experience and understands why possibilities do not always 
become realities. They learn to base decisions on what is realistic 
and practical, not idealistic and can make adaptive choices. Adults are 
also not as influenced by what others think. 
This advanced type of 
thinking is referred to as Postformal Thought (Sinnott, 1998). 

 


Dialectical Thought: In addition to moving toward more practical 
considerations, thinking in early adulthood may also become more 
flexible and balanced. Abstract ideas that the adolescent believes in 
firmly may become standards by which the adult evaluates reality. 
Adolescents tend to think in dichotomies; ideas are true or false; 
good or bad, and there is no middle ground. However, with 
experience, the adult comes to recognize that there are some right 
and some wrong in each position, some good or some bad in policy 
or approach, some truth and some falsity in a particular idea. This 
ability to bring together salient aspects of two opposing viewpoints or 
positions is referred to as dialectical thought and is considered one 
of the most advanced aspects of postformal thinking (Basseches, 
1984). Such thinking is more realistic because very few positions, 
ideas, situations, or people are completely right or wrong. So, for 
example, parents who were considered angels or devils by the 
adolescent eventually become just people with strengths and 
weaknesses, endearing qualities, and faults to the adult. 


Does everyone reach post formal or even formal operational 
thought? Formal operational thought involves being able to think 
abstractly; however, this ability does not apply to all situations or all 
adults. Formal operational thought is influenced by experience and 
education. Some adults lead lives in which they are not challenged 
to think abstractly about their world. Many adults do not receive 
any formal education and are not taught to think abstractly about 
situations they have never experienced. Further, they are also not 
exposed to conceptual tools used to formally analyze hypothetical 
situations. Those who do think abstractly may be able to do so more 
easily in some subjects than others. For example, psychology majors 
may be able to think abstractly about psychology but be unable to 
use abstract reasoning in physics or chemistry. Abstract reasoning 
in a particular field requires a knowledge base we might not have in 
all areas. Consequently, our ability to think abstractly often depends 
on our experiences. 

Education 


According to the National Center for Higher Education 
Management Systems (NCHEMS) (2016a, 2016b, 2016c, 2016d), in the 
United States: 

84% of 18 to 24-year-olds and 88% of those 25 and older have a 
high school diploma or its equivalent 
36% of 18 to 24-year-olds and 7% of 25 to 49-year-olds attend 
college 
59% of those 25 and older have completed some college 
32.5% of those 25 and older have a bachelor’s degree or higher, 
with slightly more women (33%) than men (32%) holding a 
college degree (Ryan & Bauman, 2016). 


The rate of college attainment has grown more slowly in the United 


States than in a number of other nations in recent years (OCED, 
2014). This may be due to the fact that the cost of attaining a degree 
is higher in the U.S. than in many other nations. 

In 2017, 65% of college seniors who graduated from private and 
public nonprofit colleges had student loan debt, and nationally 
owed an average of $28,650, a 1% decline from 2016 (The Institute 
for College Access & Success (TICAS), 2018). See Figure 7.17 for yearly 
comparisons. 

Figure 7.17 

According to the most recent TICAS annual report, the rate of debt 
varied widely across states, as well as between colleges. The after 
graduation debt ranged from 18,850 in Utah to $38,500 in 
Connecticut. Low-debt states are mainly in the West and high-debt 
states in the Northeast. In recent years there has been a concern 
about students carrying more debt and being more likely to default 
when attending for-profit institutions. In 2016, students at for-
profit schools borrowed an average of $39,900, which was 41% 
higher than students at non-profit schools that year. In addition, 
30% of students attending for-profit colleges default on their 
federal student loans. In contrast, the default level of those who 
attended public institutions is only 4% (TICAS, 2018). 

College student debt has become a key issue at both the state 


and federal political level, and some states have been taking steps 
to increase spending and grants to help students with the cost 
of college. However, 15% of the Class of 2017’s college debt was 
owed to private lenders (TICAS, 2018). Such debt has less consumer 
protection, fewer options for repayment, and is typically negotiated 
at a higher interest rate. See Table 7.1 for a debt comparison of 6 U.S. 
States. 

Table 7.1 

Graduate School: Larger amounts of student debt actually occur at 
the graduate level (Kreighbaum, 2019). In 2019, the highest average 
debts were concentrated in the medical fields. Average median debt 
for graduate programs including: 

$42,335 for a master’s degree 
$95,715 for a doctoral degree 
$141,000 for a professional degree 


Worldwide, over 80% of college-educated adults are employed, 
compared with just over 70% of those with a high school or 


equivalent diploma, and only 60% of those with no high school 
diploma (OECD, 2015). Those with a college degree will earn more 
over the course of their lifetime. Moreover, the benefits of a college 
education go beyond employment and finances. The OECD found 
that around the world, adults with higher educational attainment 
were more likely to volunteer, felt they had more control over their 
lives, and thus were more interested in the world around them. 
Studies of U.S. college students find that they gain a more distinct 
identity and become more socially competent, less dogmatic and 
ethnocentric compared to those not in college (Pascarella, 2006). 

Is college worth the time and investment? College is certainly a 
substantial investment each year, with the financial burden falling 
on students and their families in the U.S., and mainly by the 
government in many other nations. Nonetheless, the benefits both 
to the individual and society outweigh the initial costs. As can be 
seen in Figure 7.18, those in America with the most advanced 
degrees earn the highest income and have the lowest 
unemployment. 

Figure 7.18 


Career Development and Employment 


Work plays a significant role in the lives of people, and emerging and 
early adulthood is the time when most of us make choices that will 
establish our careers. Career development has a number of stages: 

Stage One: As children, we may select careers based on what 
appears glamorous or exciting to us (Patton & McMahon, 1999). 
There is little regard in this stage for whether we are suited for our 
occupational choices. 

Stage Two: In the second stage, teens include their abilities and 
limitations, in addition to the glamour of the occupation when 
narrowing their choices. 

Stage Three: Older teens and emerging adults narrow their 
choices further and begin to weigh more objectively the 
requirements, rewards, and downsides to careers, along with 
comparing possible careers with their own interests, values, and 
future goals (Patton & McMahon, 1999). However, some young 
people in this stage “fall-into” careers simply because these were 
what was available at the time, because of family pressures to 
pursue particular paths, or because these were high paying jobs, 
rather than from an intrinsic interest in that career path (Patton & 
McMahon, 1999). 

Stage Four: Super (1980) suggests that by our mid to late thirties, 
many adults settle in their careers. Even though they might change 
companies or move up in their position, there is a sense of 
continuity and forward motion in their career. However, some 
people at this point in their working life may feel trapped, especially 
if there is little opportunity for advancement in a more dead-end 
job. 

How have things changed for Millennials compared with previous 
generations of early adults? In recent years, young adults are more 
likely to find themselves job-hopping, and periodically returning 
to school for further education and retraining than in prior 


generations. However, researchers find that occupational interests 
remain fairly stable. 
Thus, despite the more frequent change in jobs, 
most people are generally seeking jobs with similar interests rather 
than entirely new careers (Rottinghaus, Coon, Gaffey & Zytowski, 
2007). As of 2016, millennials became the largest generation in the 
labor force (Fry, 2018) (See Figure 7.19). 

Figure 7.19 

NEETs: Around the world, teens and young adults were some of 
the hardest hit by the economic downturn in recent years (Desilver, 
2016). Consequently, a number of young people have becomeNEETs, neither employed nor in education or training. While the 
number of young people who are NEETs has declined more recently, 
there is concern that “without assistance, economically inactive 
young people won’t gain critical job skills and will never fully 
integrate into the wider economy or achieve their full earning 
potential” (Desilver, 2016, para. 3). In parts of the world where therates of NEETs are persistently high, there is also concern thathaving such large numbers of young adults with little opportunity 
may increase the chances of social unrest. 

In the United States, in 2017 over 13% of 15 to 29 year-olds were 


neither employed nor in school, (Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development, (OECD), 2019). This is down from 
2013 when approximately 18.5% of this age group fit the category 
(Desilver, 2016). More young women than men in the United States 
find themselves unemployed and not in school or training for a job. 
Additionally, most NEETs have a high school or less education, and 
Asians are less likely to be NEETs than any other ethnic group in the 
US (Desilver, 2016). 

The rate of NEETs varies around the world, with higher rates 
found in nations that have been the hardest hit by economic 
recessions, and government austerity measures. The number of 
NEETs also varies widely between the genders, although females are 
more likely to be NEETs in all nations (see Table 7.2). 

Table 7.2 

What role does gender play in career and employment? Gender 
also has an impact on career choices. Despite the rise in the number 


of women who work outside of the home, there are some career 
fields that are still pursued more by men than women. Jobs held by 
women still tend to cluster in the service sector, such as education, 
nursing, and child-care worker. While in more technical and 
scientific careers, women are greatly outnumbered by men. Jobs 
that have been traditionally held by women tend to have lower 
status, pay, benefits, and job security (Bosson, et al., 2019). In recent 
years, women have made inroads into fields once dominated by 
males, and today women are almost as likely as men to become 
medical doctors or lawyers. Despite these changes, women are 
more likely to have lower-status, and thus less pay than men in 
these professions. For instance, women are more likely to be a 
family practice doctor than a surgeon or are less likely to make 
partner in a law firm (Ceci & Williams, 2007). 

Sexism 

Sexism or gender discrimination is prejudice or discrimination 
based on a person’s sex or gender (Bosson, Vandello, & Buckner, 
2019). Sexism can affect any sex that is marginalized or oppressed in 
society; however, it is particularly documented as affecting females. 
It has been linked to stereotypes and gender roles and includes 
the belief that males are intrinsically superior to other sexes and 
genders. Extreme sexism may foster sexual harassment, rape, and 
other forms of sexual violence. 

Sexism can exist on a societal level, such as in hiring, employment 
opportunities, and education. In the United States, women are less 
likely to be hired or promoted in male-dominated professions, such 
as engineering, aviation, and construction (Blau, Ferber, & Winkler, 
2010; Ceci & Williams, 2011). In many areas of the world, young 
girls are not given the same access to nutrition, healthcare, and 
education as boys. Sexism also includes people’s expectations of 


how members of a gender group should behave. For example, 
women are expected to be friendly, passive, and nurturing; when 
a woman behaves in an unfriendly or assertive manner, she may 
be disliked or perceived as aggressive because she has violated 
a gender role (Rudman, 1998). In contrast, a man behaving in a 
similarly unfriendly or assertive way might be perceived as strong 
or even gain respect in some circumstances. 

Occupational sexism involves discriminatory practices, 
statements, or actions, based on a person’s sex, that occur in the 
workplace. One form of occupational sexism is wage discrimination. 
In 2008, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) found that while female employment rates 
have expanded, and gender employment and wage gaps have 
narrowed nearly everywhere, on average women still have a 20 
percent less chance to have a job. The Council of Economic Advisors 
(2015) found that despite women holding 49.3% of the jobs, they 
are paid only 78 cents for every $1.00 a man earns. It also found 
that despite the fact that many countries, including the U.S., have 
established anti-discrimination laws, these laws are difficult to 
enforce. A recent example of significant wage inequality occurred 
among athletes. 


2019 Women’s World Cup: The world witnessed the tremendous 
athleticism and soccer skills demonstrated by female players from 
24 different countries during the 2019 Women’s World Cup. Amid 
the cheering at the end of the final match between the United 
States and the Netherlands, were chants of “equal pay” (Channick, 
2019). 
Throughout the tournament, attention was focused on the 
discrepancy between what male soccer players earned compared 
to the female players. In winning the World Cup, the American 
women’s team earned $4 million as part of a $30 million prize pool 
(Peterson, 2019). In contrast, the French men’s team, who won the 
Men’s World Cup in 2018, earned $38 million as part of the $400 
million prize pool. The Federation of Association Football (FIFA) 
promised to double the prize money to $60 million for the 2023 
Women’s World Cup, but that still lags far behind the $440 million 
that will be given out for the Men’s World Cup in 2022. In the 
United States, the women’s soccer team generates more revenue 
and receives higher TV ratings than the men’s team, yet the women 
get paid significantly less. By winning the 2019 Women’s World Cup, 
each woman should receive $200,000, yet if the American men 
had won the 2018 Men’s World Cup, each would have received $1.1 
million (Hess, 2019). Because of this discrepancy, in March 2019, 28 
members of the women’s team filed a lawsuit against the United 
States Soccer Federation for gender discrimination and unequal pay 
(Channick, 2019). 


Factors Affecting Wage Inequality: There are many possible 
explanations for the wage gap. It has been argued in the past that 
education may account for the wage gap. However, the wage gap 
exists at every education level (Bosson et al., 2019). Men with less 
than high school to men with graduate degrees earn more than 
women with the same level of education. In addition, women now 
attain more associates, bachelor’s, and master’s degrees than men, 
and very similar levels of professional degrees and doctorates, 
according to a recent Census survey (U.S. Census Bureau, 2019). 
As the wage gap still exists in most occupations it cannot be the 
explanation. Instead, occupational segregation is a likely 
contributor to the overall wage gap, as women tend to work in very 
different occupations than men, and those jobs tend to have lower 
wages. In addition, the entry of women into a field tends to reduce 
the wages and prestige of the job. Mandel (2013) found that jobs 
typically held by men who saw the biggest influx of women into 
those careers also saw the biggest drop in wages. 

Sticky floors, which keep low-wage workers, who are more likely to 


be women and minorities, from being promoted contribute to lower 
wages (Bosson, et al. 2019). Women are disproportionately in low-
paid occupations, such as clerical, childcare, and service workers 
(Hegewisch & Ellis, 2015). They also get paid less than men in the 
same jobs, as can be seen in Table 7.3 women paid more than men 
on average; stock clerk. Men are not only being paid more in more 
masculine jobs but also in jobs typically held by women. 

Table 7.3 

Other factors include that more than half of men report having 
negotiated their salary when being hired, compared with 12% of 
women (Babcock, Gelfand, Small, & Stayn, 2006). However, people 
perceive women who negotiate more negatively then they do men, 
as assertive women, but not men, are more likely to be penalized. 
Women are also more likely to have interruptions in their careers 
either through the birth of children, or relocation due to a change 
in their partner’s job. Women are also less likely to relocate for 
the sake of their families when a better job offer comes along, and 
employers know this. It has been suggested that one reason why 
males may be offered more money is to keep them from leaving 


(Baldridge, Eddleston, & Vega, 2006). Additionally, men are more 
likely to work overtime. 

Barriers to Positions of Power: There are a few barriers to 
women achieving positions of power. The glass ceiling is the 
invisible barrier that keeps women and minorities from rising to 
higher positions regardless of their qualifications (Bosson et al., 2019). 
Women hold only 4.5% of CEO positions and 14% of top executive 
positions around the world (Noland, Moran, & Kotschwar, 2016). 
In addition, Noland and colleagues found that in a study of nearly 
22,000 companies worldwide, in 77% of those firms only 30% of 
women held an executive position or board seat. There were only 
11 companies, or 0.05% of all the firms studied, where women held 
all the executive positions and board seats. Some researchers see 
the root cause of this situation in the tacit discrimination based 
on gender, conducted by current top executives and corporate 
directors, who are primarily male. 

Often the barriers to achieving one’s goals are not obvious. For 
instance, some argue that the gender role stereotypes cast 
managerial positions as “masculine”. Unfortunately, when women do 
rise to positions of power it is often at a time when a company or 
country is faced with a major crisis. This is called the glass cliff, and 
it refers to women and minorities being placed in leadership positions 
when the risk of failure is high. For instance, female lawyers are 
more likely than their male counterparts to lead high-risk cases, 
and female politicians are more likely to be recommended to run in 
unwinnable seats (Bruckmuller, Ryan, Floor, & Haslam, 2014). 

Worldwide Gender Parity: The World Economic Forum (2017) 
introduced The Global Gender Gap Report in 2006 as a way of 
tracking gender-based disparities between men and women in the 
world. The most recent report in 2017 analyzed 144 countries on 
gender equality in the areas of economic participation and 
opportunity, educational attainment, health and survival, and 
political empowerment. Countries are then ranked to create global 
awareness of the challenges posed by gender gaps in different areas 


of the world. A parity rating of 100% would mean that females and 
males achieved equality on these measures. Results indicated: 

68% of gender parity was found worldwide across the four 
areas. Specifically, there was 96% parity in health outcomes, 
95% parity in educational attainment, 58% parity in economic 
participation, and only 23% parity in political empowerment. 
The top spots were held by smaller Western European 
countries, particularly the Nordic countries as Iceland (88% 
parity), Norway (83% parity) and Finland (82% parity) occupied 
the top three positions. 
The United States ranked 49th with 72% gender parity. 
Following the current trends, it will take 100 years for global 
gender parity. 
Improving gender parity is expected to provide significant 
economic gains for a country and closing the occupational 
gender gaps would be one way to achieve this. 


References 

Allendorf, K. (2013). Schemas of marital change: From arranged 
marriages to eloping for love. Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 
453-469. 

Alterovitz, S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2011). Partner preferences across 
the life span: Online dating by older adults. Psychology of Popular 
Media Culture, 1(S), 89-95. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (Fifth Edition). Washington, D. C.: 
Author. 

American Psychological Association. (2016). Sexual orientation and 
homosexuality. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/topics/lgbt/
orientation.aspx 

Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of development 


from late teens through the twenties. American Psychologist, 55, 
469-480. 

Arnett, J. J. (2001). Conceptions of the transitions to adulthood: 
Perspectives from adolescence to midlife. Journal of Adult 
Development, 8, 133-143. 

Arnett, J. J. (2003). Conceptions of the transition to adulthood 
among emerging adults in American ethnic groups. New 
Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 100, 63–75. 

Arnett, J. J. (2004). Conceptions of the transition to adulthood 
among emerging adults in American ethnic groups. In J. J. Arnett 
& N. Galambos (Eds.), Cultural conceptions of the transition to 
adulthood: New directions in child and adolescent development. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Arnett, J. J. (2006). G. Stanley Hall’s adolescence: Brilliance and non-
sense. History of Psychology, 9, 186-197. Arnett, J.J. (2007). The 
long and leisurely route: Coming of age in Europe today. Current 
History, 106, 130-136. 

Arnett, J. J. (2011). Emerging adulthood(s): The cultural psychology 
of a new life stage. In L.A. Jensen (Ed.), Bridging cultural and 
developmental psychology: New syntheses in theory, research, and 
policy (pp. 255–275). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Arnett, J. J. (2016). Does emerging adulthood theory apply across 
social classes? National data on a persistent question. Emerging 
Adulthood, 4(4), 227-235. 

Arnett, J. J., & Taber, S. (1994). Adolescence terminable and 
interminable: When does adolescence end? Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 23, 517–537. 

Aquilino, W. S. (2006). Family relationships and support systems in 
emerging adulthood. In J. J. Arnett & J. L. Tanner (Eds.), Emerging 
adults in America: Coming of age in the 21st century (pp. 193-217). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Babcock, L., Gelfand, M., Small, D., & Stayn, H. (2006). Gender 
differences in the propensity to initiate negotiations. In D. De 


Cremer, M. Zelenberg, & J.K. Muringham (Eds.), Social psychology 
and economics (pp. 239-262). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B. (2008). Becoming friends 
by chance. Psychological Science, 19(5), 439–440. Bailey, J. M., & 
Pillard, R. C. (1991). A genetic study of male sexual orientation. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1089-1096. 

Bailey, J. M., Pillard, R. C., Neale, M. C. & Agyei, Y. (1993). Heritable 
factors influence sexual orientation in women. Archives of General 
Psychology, 50, 217-223. 

Baldridge, D.C., Eddleston, K.A., & Vega, J.F. (2006). Saying no to 
being uprooted: The impact of family and gender on willingness to 
relocate. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 
79, 131-149. 

Balthazart, J. (2018). Fraternal birth order effect on sexual 
orientation explained. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 115(2), 234-236. 

Bartholomew, K. (1990). Avoidance of intimacy: An attachment 
perspective. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 7, 147-178. 
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3524.61.2.226. 

Basseches, M. (1984). Dialectical thinking and adult development. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Pub. 

Bauermeister, J. A., Johns, M. M., Sandfort, T. G., Eisenberg, A., 
Grossman, A. H., & D’Augelli, A. R. (2010). Relationship trajectories 
and psychological well-being among sexual minority youth. 
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 39(10), 1148-1163. 

Belsky, J. (1984). The determinants of parenting: A process model. 
Child Development, 55, 83–96. 

Benokraitis, N. V. (2005). Marriages and families: Changes, choices, 
and constraints (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. 

Berger, K. S. (2005). The developing person through the life span (6th 
ed.). New York: Worth. 

Bisson, M. A., & Levine, T. R. (2009). Negotiating a friends with 
benefits relationship. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 66–73. 
doi:10.1007/s10508-007-9211-2 


Blanchard, R. (2001). Fraternal birth order and the maternal immune 
hypothesis of male homosexuality. Hormones and Behavior, 40, 
105-114. 

Blau, F. D., Ferber, M. A., & Winkler, A. E. (2010). The economics of 
women, men and work. (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Prentice Hall. 

Bogaert, A. F. (2015). Asexuality: What it is and why it matters. 
Journal of Sex Research, 52(4), 362-379. doi:10.1080/
00224499.2015.1015713 

Bogle, K. A. (2007). The shift from dating to hooking up in college: 
What scholars have missed. Sociology Compass, 1/2, 775– 788. 

Bogle, K. A. (2008). Hooking up: Sex, dating, and relationships on 
campus. New York, NY: New York University Press. 

Bohlin, G., & Hagekull, B. (2009). Socio-emotional development from 
infancy to young adulthood. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 
50, 592-601. 

Borgogna, N. C., McDermott, R. C., Aita, S. L., & Kridel, M. M. (2019). 
Anxiety and depression across gender and sexual minorities: 
Implications for transgender, gender nonconforming, pansexual, 
demisexual, asexual, queer and questioning individuals. 
Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity, 6(1), 54-63. 

Bosson, J. K., Vandello, J., & Buckner, C. (2019). The psychology of sex 
and gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Boundless. (2016). Physical development in adulthood. Boundles 
Psychology. Retrieved from https://www.boundless.com/
psychology/textbooks/boundless-psychology-textbook/
human-development-14/early-and- middle-adulthood-74/
physical-development-in-adulthood-287-12822/ 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1989). Ecological systems theory. In R. Vasta 
(Ed.), Annals of Child Development, Vol. 6 (pp. 187–251). Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press. 

Brooks-Gunn, J., & Lewis, M. (1981). Infant social perception: 
Responses to pictures of parents and strangers. Developmental 
Psychology, 17(5), 647–649. 

Brown, A. (2019). Couples who meet online are more diverse than 
those who meet in other ways, largely because they’re younger. Pew 


Research Center. Retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2019/06/24/couples-who-meet-online-are-more-
diverse-than-those-who-meet-in-other-ways-largely-because-
theyre-younger/ 

Bruckmuller, S., Ryan, M.K., Floor, R., & Haslam, S.A. (2014). The 
glass cliff: Examining why women occupy leadership positions in 
precarious circumstances. In S. Kumra, R. Simpson, & R.J. Burke 
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of gender in organizations (pp. 314-331). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Bryant, K. & Sheldon, P. (2017). Cyber dating in the age of mobile 
apps: Understanding motives, attitudes, and characteristics of 
users. American Communication Journal, 19(2), 1-15. 

Bumpass, L. L. (1990). What’s happening to the family? Interactions 
between demographic and institutional change. Demography, 
27(4), 483–498. 

Butzer, B., & Campbell, L. (2008). Adult attachment, sexual 
satisfaction, and relationship satisfaction: A study of married 
couples. Personal Relationships, 15, 141-154. 

Cain, S. (2012). Quiet. New York: Crown Publishing Group. 

Campbell, L., Simpson, J. A., Boldry, J., & Kashy, D. A. (2005). 
Perceptions of conflict and support in romantic relationships: 
The role of attachment anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88, 510-532. 

Carlson, N. R. (2011). Foundations of behavioral neuroscience (8th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson Education. 

Carroll, J. L. (2007). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (2nd ed.). 
Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning. 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Ceci, S. J., & Williams, W. M. (2011). Understanding current causes 
of women’s under-representation in science. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science of the United States of America, 108(8), 
3157-3162. doi:10.1073/pnas.1014871108 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2014). Reported STDs 


in the United States. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/std/
stats14/std-trends-508.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015a). Births and 
natality. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
births.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015b). Obesity and 
overweight. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
obesity-overweight.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). Adult obesity 
causes and consequences. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/
obesity/adult/causes.html 

Channick, R. (2019, July 9). Putting gender pay gap onto a broader 
stage. The Chicago Tribune, pp. 1-2. 

Chappell, K. D., & Davis, K. E. (1998). Attachment, partner choice, 
and perception of romantic partners: An experimental test of 
the attachment-security hypothesis. Personal Relationships, 5, 
327–342. 

Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1987). Origins and evolution of behavior 
disorders. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Chopik, W. J., Edelstein, R. S., & Fraley, R. C. (2013). From the cradle 
to the grave: Age differences in attachment from early adulthood 
to old age. Journal or Personality, 81 (2), 171-183 DOI: 10.1111/j. 
1467-6494.2012.00793 

Cicirelli, V. (2009). Sibling relationships, later life. In D. Carr (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of the life course and human development. Boston, 
MA: Cengage. 

Clark, L. A., Kochanska, G., & Ready, R. (2000). Mothers’ personality 
and its interaction with child temperament as predictors of 
parenting behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
79, 274–285. 

Clark, L. A. & Watson, D. (1999). Temperament: A new paradigm 
for trait theory. In L.A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of 
personality. NY: Guilford. 

Clarke, L., & Nichols, J. (1972). I have more fun with you than anybody.
New York, NY: St. Martin’s. 


Cohen, P. (2013). Marriage is declining globally. Can you say that?
Retrieved from https://familyinequality.wordpress.com/2013/
06/12/marriage-is-declining/ 

Cohen-Bendehan, C. C., van de Beek, C. & Berenbaum, S. A. (2005). 
Prenatal sex hormone effects on child and adult sex-typed 
behavior: Methods and findings. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 47, 230-237. 

Cohn, D. (2013). In Canada, most babies now born to women 30 and 
older. Pew Research Center. 

Conger, R. D., & Conger, K. J. (2002). Resilience in Midwestern 
families: Selected findings from the first decade of a prospective 
longitudinal study. Journal of Marriage and Family, 64, 361–373. 

Copen, C.E., Daniels, K., & Mosher, W.D. (2013) First premarital 
cohabitation in the United States: 2006–2010 National Survey of 
Family Growth. National health statistics reports; no 64. 
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 

Council of Economic Advisors. (2015). Gender pay gap: Recent trends 
and explanations. Retrieved from https://www.whitehouse.gov/
sites/default/files/docs/equal_pay_issue_brief_final.pdf 

Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Tenenbaum, H. R., & Allen, E. (2001). 
Parents explain more often to boys than to girls during shared 
scientific thinking. Psychological Science, 12, 258–261. 

Davidson, R. J. & Begley, S. (2012). The emotional life of your brain. 
New York: Penguin. 

Davis, J. L., & Rusbult, C. E. (2001). Attitude alignment in close 
relationships. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 81(1), 
65–84. 

Demick, J. (1999). Parental development: Problem, theory, method, 
and practice. In R. L. Mosher, D. J. Youngman, & J. M. Day (Eds.), 
Human development across the life span: Educational and 
psychological applications (pp. 177–199). Westport, CT: Praeger. 

Desai, S., & Andrist, L. (2010). Gender scripts and age at marriage in 
India. Demography, 47, 667-687. doi:10.1353/dem.0.0118 Desilver, 
D. (2016) Millions of young people in the US and EU are neither 


working nor learning. Pew Research Center (January 28, 2016). 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/01/28/us-eu-
neet-population/ 

Diamond, M. (2002). Sex and gender are different: Sexual identity 
and gender identity are different. Clinical Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 7(3), 320-334. 

Douglass, C. B. (2007). From duty to desire: Emerging adulthood in 
Europe and its consequences. Child Development Perspectives, 1, 
101–108. 

Driver, J., & Gottman, J. (2004). Daily marital interactions and 
positive affect during marital conflict among newlywed couples. 
Family Process, 43, 301–314. 

Dunn, J. (1984). Sibling studies and the developmental impact of 
critical incidents. In P.B. Baltes & O.G. Brim (Eds.), Life-span 
development and behavior (Vol 6). Orlando, FL: Academic Press. 

Dunn, J. (2007). Siblings and socialization. In J. E. Grusec & P. D. 
Hastings (Eds.), Handbook of socialization. New York: Guilford. 

Dye, J. L. (2010). Fertility of American women: 2008. Current 
Population Reports. Retrieved from www.census.gov/prod/
2010pubs/p20-563.pdf. 

Ebrahimi, L., Amiri, M., Mohamadlou, M., & Rezapur, R. (2017). 
Attachment stules, parenting styles, and depression. International 
Journal of Mental Health, 15, 1064-1068. 

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Shepard, S. A., Guthrie, I.K., Murphy, 
B.C., & Reiser, M. (1999). Parental reactions to children’s negative 
emotions: Longitudinal relations to quality of children’s social 
functioning. Child Development, 70, 513-534. 

Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Spinrad, T., Gershoff, E., Valiente, C., 
Losoya, S. L., Zhou, Q., Cumberland, A., Liew, J., Reiser, M., & 
Maxon, E. (2008). Understanding parent-adolescent conflict 
discussions: Concurrent and across-time prediction from youths’ 
dispositions and parenting. Monographs of the Society for Research 
in Child Development, 73, (Serial No. 290, No. 2), 1-160. 

Erikson, E. H. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton. 
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton. 


Finkel, E. J., Burnette J. L., & Scissors L. E. (2007). Vengefully ever 
after: Destiny beliefs, state attachment anxiety, and forgiveness. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 871–886. 

Fraley, R. C. (2013). Attachment through the life course. In R. Biswas-
Diener & E. Diener (Eds), Noba textbook series: Psychology. 
Champaign, IL: DEF publishers. Retrieved from nobaproject.com. 

Fraley, R. C., Hudson, N. W., Heffernan, M. E., & Segal, N. (2015). Are 
adult attachment styles categorical or dimensional? A taxometric 
analysis of general and relationship-specific attachment 
orientations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 109 (2),
354-368. 

Fraley, R. C., Roisman, G. I., Booth-LaForce, C., Owen, M. T., & 
Holland, A. S. (2013). Interpersonal and genetic origins of adult 
attachment styles: A longitudinal study from infancy to early 
adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 
8817-838. 

Frazier, P. A, Byer, A. L., Fischer, A. R., Wright, D. M., & DeBord, K. 
A. (1996). Adult attachment style and partner choice: Correlational 
and experimental findings. Personal Relationships, 3, 117–136. 

Freitas, A. L., Azizian, A., Travers, S., & Berry, S. A. (2005). The 
evaluative connotation of processing fluency: Inherently positive 
or moderated by motivational context? Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 41(6), 636–644. 

Frieden, T. (2011, January 14). Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
for the Centers for Disease Control (United States, Center for 
Disease Control). Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/su6001al.htm?s_su6001al_w 

Friedman, H. S., Tucker, J. S., Tomlinson-Keasey, C., Schwartz, J. E., 
Wingard, D. L., & Criqui, M. H. (1993). Does childhood personality 
predict longevity? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 
176–185. doi:10.1037/0022- 3514.65.1.176 

Fry, R. (2016). For the first time in the modern era, living with parents 
edges out other living arrangements for 18- to 34- year-olds.
Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center. 

Fry, R. (2018). Millennials are the largest generation in the U. S. labor 


force. Retrieved from: https://www.pewresearch.org/fact- tank/
2018/04/11/millennials-largest-generation-us-labor-force/ 

Fryar, C. D., Carroll, M. D., & Ogden, C. L. (2014). Prevalence of 
overweight, obesity, and extreme obesity among adults: United 
States, 1960-1962 through 2011-2012. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_adult_11_12/
obesity_adult_11_12.htm 

Gallup Poll Report (2016). What millennials want from work and 
life. Business Journal. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/
businessjournal/191435/millennials-work-life.aspx 

Garcia, J. R., & Reiber, C. (2008). Hook-up behavior: A 
biopsychosocial perspective. The Journal of Social, Evolutionary, 
and Cultural Psychology, 2, 192–208. 

Garcia, J. R., Reiber, C., Massey, S. G., & Merriwether, A. M. (2012). 
Sexual hookup culture: A review. Review of General Psychology, 
16(2), 161-176. doi:10.1037/a0027911 

Gates, G. J. (2011). How many people are lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender? Retrieved from 
http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/research/census-lgbt-
demographics-studies/how-many-people-are-lesbian-gay- 
bisexual-and-transgender/ 

Gonzales, N. A., Coxe, S., Roosa, M. W., White, R. M. B., Knight, 
G. P., Zeiders, K. H., & Saenz, D. (2011). Economic hardship, 
neighborhood context, and parenting: Prospective effects on 
Mexican-American adolescent’s mental health. American Journal 
of Community Psychology, 47, 98–113. doi: 10.1007/
s10464-010-9366-1 

Gottman, J. M. (1999). Couple’s handbook: Marriage Survival Kit 
Couple’s Workshop. Seattle, WA: Gottman Institute. 

Gottman, J. M., Carrere, S., Buehlman, K. T., Coan, J. A., & Ruckstuhl, 
L. (2000). Predicting marital stability and divorce in newlywed 
couples. Journal of Family Psychology, 14(1), 42-58. 

Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital processes 
predictive of later dissolution: Behavior, physiology and health. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 221–233. 


Grello, C. M., Welsh, D. P., Harper, M. S., & Dickson, J. W. (2003). 
Dating and sexual relationship trajectories and adolescent 
functioning. Adolescent & Family Health, 3, 103–112. 

Grusec, J. E., Goodnow, J. J., & Cohen, L. (1996). Household work and 
the development of concern for others. Developmental Psychology, 
32, 999–1007. 

Gurrentz, B. (2018). For young adults, cohabitation is up, and 
marriage is down. US. Census Bureau. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2018/11/cohabitaiton-
is-up-marriage-is-down-for-young-adults.html. 

Gwinnell, E. (1998). Online seductions: Falling in love with strangers 
on the Internet. New York: Johnson Publishing. 

Hales, C.M., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Ogden, C.L. (2017). 
Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: United States, 
2015–2016. NCHS data brief, no 288. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics. 

Hamilton, B. E., Martin, J. A., & Ventura, S. J. (2011). Births: 
Preliminary data for 2010. National Vital Statistics Reports, 60(2). 

Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Harmon-Jones, E., & Allen, J. J. B. (2001). The role of affect in the 
mere exposure effect: Evidence from psychophysiological and 
individual differences approaches. Personality & Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 27(7), 889–898. 

Harvard Health Letter. (2012). Raising your conscientiousness. 
Retrieved from http://www.helath.harvard.edu 

Hatfield, E., & Rapson, R. L. (2006). Love and sex: Cross-cultural 
perspectives. New York, NY: University Press of America. 

Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an 
attachment process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
52 (3), 511-524. 

Hegewisch, A., & Ellis, E. (2015). The gender wage gap by occupation 
2014 and by race and ethnicity. Washington DC: Institute for 
Women’s Policy Research. Retrieved from http://www.iwpr.org/
publications/pubs/the-gender-wage-gap-by- 
occupation-2014-and-by-race-and-ethnicity. 


Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. S. (Eds.). (2000). Close relationships: A 
sourcebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Heron, M. P., & Smith, B. L. (2007). Products – Health E Stats – 
Homepage. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved 
from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/hestats/
leadingdeath03/leadingdeath03.htm 

Hess, A. (2019). Today is the Women’s World Cup final between the US 
and Netherlands—here’s how much money is on the line. Retrieved 
from https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/04/womens-world-cup-
final-how-much-money-is-on-the- line.html 

Holland, A. S., Fraley, R. C., & Roisman, G. I. (2012). Attachment 
styles in dating couples: Predicting relationship functioning over 
time. Personal Relationships, 19, 234-246. doi: 10.1111/
j.1475-6811.2011.01350.x 

Hudson, N. W., Fraley, R. C., Vicary, A. M., & Brumbaugh, C. C. (2012). 
Attachment coregulation: A longitudinal investigation of the 
coordination in romantic partners’ attachment styles. Manuscript 
under review. 

Hyde, J. S., Bigler, R., Joel, D., Tate, C., & van Anders, S. (2019). The 
future of sex and gender in psychology: Five challenges to the 
gender binary. American Psychologist, 74(2), 171-193. 

Hyde, J. S., Else-Quest, N. M., & Goldsmith, H. H. (2004). Children’s 
temperament and behavior problems predict their employed 
mothers’ work functioning. Child Development, 75, 580–594. 

Institute for College Access & Success. (2018). Student debt and the 
class of 2017. Retrieved from https://ticas.org/posd/home. 

Janicki, D., Kamarck, T., Shiffman, S., & Gwaltney, C. (2006). 
Application of ecological momentary assessment to the study of 
marital adjustment and social interactions during daily life. 
Journal of Family Psychology, 20, 168–172. 

John, O. P., Naumann, L. P., & Soto, C. J. (2008). Paradigm shift to the 
integrative Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and 
conceptual issues. In O. P. John, R. R. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), 
Handbook of personality. Theory and research (3rd ed., pp. 114–158). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press. 301 


John, O. P., Robins, R. W., & Pervin, L. A. (2008). Handbook of 
personality. Theory and research (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press. 

Kagan, J. (2002). Behavioral inhibition as a temperamental category. 
In R.J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer, & H. H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook 
of affective sciences. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Kerr, D. C. R., Capaldi, D. M., Pears, K. C., & Owen, L. D. (2009). 
A prospective three generational study of fathers’ constructive 
parenting: Influences from family of origin, adolescent 
adjustment, and offspring temperament. Developmental 
Psychology, 45, 1257–1275. 

Kiff, C. J., Lengua, L. J., & Zalewski, M. (2011). Nature and nurturing: 
Parenting in the context of child temperament. Clinical Child 
and Family Psychology Review, 14, 251–301. doi: 10.1007/
s10567011-0093-4 

Kinsey, A., Pomeroy, W.B., & Martin, C. E. (1948). Sexual behavior in 
the human male. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders. Krebs, C., Lindquist, 
C., Warner, T., Fisher, B., & Martin, S. (2009). College women’s 
experiences with physically forced, alcohol or other drug-
enabled, and drug-facilitated sexual assault before and since 
entering college. Journal of American College Health, 57(6), 
639-649. 

Kreighbaum, A. (2019). Six figures in debt for a master’s degree. 
Retrieved from https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2019/
06/03/updated-college-scorecard-puts-spotlight-graduate-
student- borrowing 

Laursen, B., & Jensen-Campbell, L. A. (1999). The nature and 
functions of social exchange in adolescent romantic relationships. 
In W. Furman, B. B. Brown, & C. Feiring (Eds.), The development 
of romantic relationships in adolescence (pp. 50– 74). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Lesthaeghe, R. J., & Surkyn, J. (1988). Cultural dynamics and 
economic theories of fertility change. Population and 
Development Review 14(1), 1–45. 

Lucas, R. E. & Donnellan, A. B. (2011). Personality development across 


the life span: Longitudinal analyses with a national sample from 
Germany. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 847–861 

Madden, M. & Lenhart, A. (2006). Americans who are seeking 
romance use the Internet to help them in their search, but there 
is still widespread public concern about safety of online dating. 
Pew/Internet and American Life Project. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2006/OnlineDating.aspx 

Mandel, H. (2013). Up the down staircase: Women’s upward mobility 
and the wage penalty for occupational feminization, 1970- 2007. 
Social Forces, 91, 1183-1207. 

Manning, W. S., Giordano, P. C., & Longmore, M. A. (2006). Hooking 
up: The relationship contexts of “nonrelationship” sex. Journal of 
Adolescent Research, 21, 459–483. doi:10.1177/0743558406291692 

Martinez, G., Daniels, K., & Chandra, A. (2012). Fertility of men and 
women aged 15-44 years in the United States: National Survey 
of Family Growth, 2006-2010. National Health Statistics Reports, 
51(April). Hyattsville, MD: U.S., Department of Health and Human 
Services. 

McClure, M. J., Lydon., J. E., Baccus, J., & Baldwin, M. W. (2010). 
A signal detection analysis of the anxiously attached at speed-
dating: Being unpopular is only the first part of the problem. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 1024–1036. 

Menkin, J. A., Robles, T. F., Wiley, J. F., & Gonzaga, G. C. (2015). Online 
dating across the life span: Users’ relationship goals. Psychology 
and Aging, 30(4), 987-993. 

Mita, T. H., Dermer, M., & Knight, J. (1977). Reversed facial images 
and the mere-exposure hypothesis. Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology, 35(8), 597–601. 

National Center for Transgender Equality. (2015). National 
transgender discrimination survey. Retrieved from 
http://www.transequality.org/issues/national-transgender-
discrimination-survey 

National Conference of State Legislatures. (2017, June). Cyberbullies 
go catfishing. State Legislatures, 8. 


National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2015). College 
Drinking. Retrieved from http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/
publications/CollegeFactSheet/CollegeFact.htm 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2016). Alcohol 
facts and statistics. Retrieved from http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/
publications/AlcoholFacts&Stats/AlcoholFacts&Stats.htm 

National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2015). College-age and young 
adults. Retrieved from https://www.drugabuse.gov/related- 
topics/college-age-young-adults/college-addiction-studies-
programs 

National Institute of Drug Abuse. (2018). College-age and young 
adults. Retrieved from https://www.drugabuse.gov/related- 
topics/college-age-young-adults 

NCHEMS. (2016a). Percent of adults 18 to 24 with a high school 
diploma. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/?level=nation&mode=graph&state=0&submeasure=344 

NCHEMS. (2016b). Percent of adults 18 to 24 who are attending 
college. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems. Retrieved from: http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/
index.php?submeasure=331&year=2009&level=nation&mode=graph&state=0 

NCHEMS. (2016c). Percent of adults 25 to 49 who are attending 
college. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems. Retrieved from: http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/
index.php?submeasure=332&year=2009&level=nation&mode=graph&state=0 

NCHEMS. (2016d). Percent who earn a Bachelor’s degree within 6 
years. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems. Retrieved from http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/?level=nation&mode=graph&state=0&submeasure=27 

Nelson, L. J., Badger, S., & Wu, B. (2004). The influence of culture 


in emerging adulthood: Perspectives of Chinese college students. 
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 28, 26–36. 

Noland, M., Moran, T., & Kotschwar, B. (2016). Is gender diversity 
profitable? Evidence from a global survey. Washington, DC: 
Peterson Institute for International Economics. Retrieved from 
https://www.piie.com/publications/working-papers/gender- 
diversity-profitable-evidence-global-survey. 

OECD. (2014). Education at a Glance 2014: United States, OECD 
Publishing. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/unitedstates/
United%20States-EAG2014-Country-Note.pdf 

OECD. (2015). Education at a Glance 2015: OECD Indicators, OECD 
Publishing. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/
eag-2015-en 

Office of Adolescent Health. (2019). Prevalence of adolescent opioid 
misuse. Retrieved from https://www.hhs.gov/ash/oah/
adolescent-development/substance-use/drugs/opioids/
index.html#prevalence 

Oliver, M. B., & Hyde, J. S. (1993). Gender differences in sexuality: 
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 29–51. doi:10.1037/
0033-2909.114.1.29 

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2019). 
Youth on in employment, education, or training data. Retrieved 
from https://data.oecd.org/youthinac/youth-not-in-
employment-education-or-training-neet.htm 

Owen, J., & Fincham, F. D. (2011). Young adults’ emotional reactions 
after hooking up encounters. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40,321–330. doi:10.1007/s10508-010-9652-x 

Pascarella, E.T. (2006). How college effects students: Ten directions 
for future research. Journal of College Student Development, 47, 
508-520. 

Patton, W. & McMahon, M. (1999). Career development and systems 
theory: A new relationship. Brooks Cole Publishers. Peterson, A. 
(2019, July 9). Women’s World Cup. Changes could go global. The 
Chicago Tribune, p. 5. 

Pew Research Center. (2019). Same-sex marriage around the world. 


Retrieved from https://www.pewforum.org/fact-sheet/gay- 
marriage-around-the-world/ 

Phinney, J. S. & Baldelomar, O. A. (2011). Identity development in 
multiple cultural contexts. In L. A. Jensen (Ed.), Bridging cultural 
and developmental psychology: New syntheses in theory, research 
and policy (pp. 161-186). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Potard, C., Courtois, R., & Rusch, E. (2008). The influences of peers 
on risky behavior during adolescence. European Journal of 
Contraception and Reproductive Health Care, 13(30, 264-270. 

Prinzie, P., Stams, G. J., Dekovic, M., Reijntjes, A. H., & Belsky, J. 
(2009). The relations between parents’ Big Five personality factors 
and parenting: A meta-review. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 97, 351–362. 

Rankin, L. A. & Kenyon, D. B. (2008). Demarcating role transitions 
as indicators of adulthood in the 21st century. Who are they? 
Journal of Adult Development, 15(2), 87-92. doi: 10.1007/
s10804-007-9035-2 

Reis, H. T., & Aron, A. (2008). Love: What is it, why does it matter, and 
how does it operate? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3(1), 
80–86. 

Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N., Shiner, R., N., Caspi, A., & Goldberg, L. 
R. (2007). The power of personality: The comparative validity of 
personality traits, socioeconomic status, and cognitive ability for 
predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 2(4), 313–345. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00047. 

Roberts, B. W., & Mroczek, D. K. (2008). Personality trait change in 
adulthood. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 31–35. 

Rosenberger, N. (2007). Rethinking emerging adulthood in Japan: 
Perspectives from long-term single women. Child Development 
Perspectives, 1, 92–95. 

Rottinghaus, P. J., Coon, K. L., Gaffey, A. R., & Zytowski, D. G. (2007). 
Thirty-year stability and predictive validity of vocational interests. 
Journal of Career Assessment, 15 (1), 5-23. 

Rudman, L. A. (1998). Self-promotion as a risk factor for women: 
The costs and benefits of counterstereotypical impression 


management. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(3), 
629-645. 

Ryan, C. L. & Bauman, K. (March 2016). Educational Attainment in 
the United States: 2015. U.S. Department of Commerce Economics 
and Statistics Administration. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/
publications/2016/demo/p20-578.pdf 

Ryle, R. (2011). Questioning gender. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publishing. 

Schindler, I., Fagundes, C. P., & Murdock, K. W. (2010). Predictors 
of romantic relationship formation: Attachment style, prior 
relationships, and dating goals. Personal Relationships, 17, 97-105. 

Schmitt, D. P., Alcalay, L., Allik, J., Ault, L., Austers, I., Bennett, K. L., 
. . . Zupane`ie`, A. (2003). Universal sex differences in the desire 
for sexual variety: Tests from 52 nations, 6 continents, and 13 
islands. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 85–104. 
doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.85.1.85 

Schwartz, G., Kim, R., Kolundzija, A., Rieger, G., & Sanders, A. (2010). 
Biodemographic and physical correlates of sexual orientation in 
men. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 93-109. 

Simpson, J. A., Collins, W. A., Tran, S., & Haydon, K. C. (2007). 
Attachment and the experience and expression of emotions in 
adult romantic relationships: A developmental perspective. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 355–367. 

Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., Oriña, M. M., & Grich, J. (2002). Working 
models of attachment, support giving, and support seeking in a 
stressful situation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 
598-608. 

Sinnott, J. D. (1998). The development of logic in adulthood. NY: 
Plenum Press. 

Smith, A., & Anderson, M. (2016). 5 facts about online dating. Pew 
Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2016/02/29/5-facts-about-online-dating 

Smith, S., Zhang, X., Basile, K., Merrick, M., Wang, J., Kresnow, M., 
& Chen, J. (2018). National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence 


Survey, United States, 2015. Retrieved from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/2015data- 
brief508.pdf 

Society for the Study of Emerging Adulthood (SSEA). (2016). 
Overview. Retrieved from http://ssea.org/about/index.htm 

Sternberg, R. (1988). A triangular theory of love. New York: Basic. 

Super, D. E. (1980). A life-span life-space approach to career 
development. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 13, 282-298. Tamis-
LeMonda, C. S., Way, N., Hughes, D., Yoshikawa, H., Kalman, R. 
K., & Niwa, E. Y. (2008). Parents’ goals for children: The dynamic 
coexistence of individualism and collectivism in cultures and 
individuals. Social Development, 17, 183– 209. doi:10.1111/
j.1467.9507.2007.00419.x 

Tannen, D. (1990). You just don’t understand: Women and men in 
conversation. New York: Morrow. 

Thornton, A. (2005). Reading history sideways: The fallacy and 
enduring impact of the developmental paradigm on family life. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

TICAS. (2015). Student debt and the class of 2014, The Institute for 
College Access & Success. Retrieved from http://ticas.org/sites/
default/files/pub_files/classof2014.pdf 

Tye, M. H. (2006). Social inequality and well-being: Race-related 
stress, self-esteem, and life satisfaction among African American 
gay and bisexual men. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section 
B, 67(4-B), 0419-4217. 

UNdata (2010). Gross enrollment ratio in tertiary education. United 
Nations Statistics Division. Retrieved November 5, 2010, from 
http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?d=GenderStat&f=inID:68 

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2011). Human 
development report. NY: Oxford University Press. 

Untied, A., Orchowski, L., Mastroleo, N., & Gidycz, C. (2012). College 
students’ social reactions to the victim in a hypothetical sexual 
assault scenario: The role of victim and perpetrator alcohol use. 
Violence and Victims, 27(6), 957-972. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). Educational attainment in the United 


States: 2018. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/data/
tables/2018/demo/education-attainment/cps-detailed-
tables.html 

Violence Policy Center. (2018). More than 1,800 women murdered by 
men in one year, new study finds. Retrieved from http://vpc.org/
press/more-than-1800-women-murdered-by-men-in-one-
year-new-study-finds/ 

Volko, N. D. (2004, September 19). Exploring the Whys of Adolescent 
Drug Use. (United States, National Institute on Drug Abuse). 
Retrieved from http://www.drugabuse.gov/NIDA_notes/
NNvol19N3/DirRepVol19N3.html 

Wang, W., & Parker, K. (2014). Record share of Americans have never 
married: As values, economics and gender patterns change. 
Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2014/09/
2014-09-24_Never- Married-Americans.pdf 

Wang, W., & Taylor, P. (2011). For Millennials, parenthood trumps 
marriage. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 

Welsh, D. P., Grello, C. M., & Harper, M. S. (2006). No strings 
attached: The nature of casual sex in college students. Journal of 
Sex Research, 43, 255–267. doi:10.1080/00224490609552324 

Wighton, K. (2016). World’s obese population hits 640 million, 
according to largest ever study. Imperial College. Retrieved from 
http://www3.imperial.ac.uh/newsandeventspggrp/
imperialcollege/newssummary/news_311-3-2016-22-34-39 

Williams, L., Kabamalan, M., & Ogena, N. (2007). Cohabitation in the 
Philippines: Attitudes and behaviors among young women and 
men. Journal of Marriage and Family, 69(5), 1244–1256. 

Witt, J. (2009). SOC. New York: McGraw Hill. 

World Economic Forum. (2017). Global Gender Gap Report 2017. 
Retrieved from: http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-
report-2017/key-findings/ 

Yu, J., & Xie, Y. (2015). Cohabitation in China: Trends and 
determinants. Population & Development Review, 41 (4), 607-628. 


Zebrowitz, L. A., Bronstad, P. M., & Lee, H. K. (2007). The 
contribution of face familiarity to ingroup favoritism and 
stereotyping. Social Cognition, 25(2), 306–338. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 7 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 24: Psychosocial 
Development in Early 
Adulthood 

Chapter 24 Learning Objectives 

Describe the relationship between infant and adult 
temperament 
Explain personality in early adulthood 
Explain the five factor model of personality 
Describe adult attachment styles 
Describe Erikson’s stage of intimacy vs. isolation 
Identify the factors affecting attraction 
Differentiate among the types of love 
Describe adult lifestyles, including singlehood, 
cohabitation, and marriage 
Describe the factors that influence parenting 


Temperament and Personality in Adulthood 

If you remember from chapter 3, temperament is defined as the 
innate characteristics of the infant, including mood, activity level, 


and emotional reactivity, noticeable soon after birth. Does one’s 
temperament remain stable throughout the lifespan? Do shy and 
inhibited babies grow up to be shy adults, while the sociable child 
continues to be the life of the party? Like most developmental 
research the answer is more complicated than a simple yes or no. 
Chess and Thomas (1987), who identified children as easy, difficult, 
slow-to-warm-up or blended, found that children identified as easy 
grew up to became well-adjusted adults, while those who exhibited 
a difficult temperament were not as well-adjusted as adults. Kagan 
(2002) studied the temperamental category of inhibition to the 
unfamiliar in children. Infants exposed to unfamiliarity reacted 
strongly to the stimuli and cried loudly, pumped their limbs, and had 
an increased heart rate. Research has indicated that these highly 
reactive children show temperamental stability into early childhood, 
and Bohlin and Hagekull (2009) found that shyness in infancy was 
linked to social anxiety in adulthood. 

An important aspect of this research on inhibition was looking 
at the response of the amygdala, which is important for fear and 
anxiety, especially when confronted with possible threatening 
events in the environment. Using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (FMRIs) young adults identified as strongly inhibited 
toddlers showed heightened activation of the amygdala when 
compared to those identified as uninhibited toddlers (Davidson & 
Begley, 2012). 

The research does seem to indicate that temperamental stability 
holds for many individuals through the lifespan, yet we know that 
one’s environment can also have a significant impact. Recall from 
our discussion on epigenesis or how environmental factors are 
thought to change gene expression by switching genes on and off.
Many cultural and environmental factors can affect one’s 
temperament, including supportive versus abusive child-rearing, 
socioeconomic status, stable homes, illnesses, teratogens, etc. 
Additionally, individuals often choose environments that support 
their temperament, which in turn further strengthens them (Cain, 
2012). In summary, because temperament is genetically driven, 


genes appear to be the major 
reason why temperament remains 
stable into adulthood. In contrast, the environment appears mainly 
responsible for any change in temperament (Clark & Watson, 1999). 

Everybody has their own unique personality; that is, their 
characteristic manner of thinking, feeling, behaving, and relating to 
others (John, Robins, & Pervin, 2008). Personality traits refer to these 
characteristics, routine ways of thinking, feeling, and relating to 
others. Personality integrates one’s temperament with cultural and 
environmental influences. Consequently, there are signs or 
indicators of these traits in childhood, but they become particularly 
evident when the person is an adult. Personality traits are integral to 
each person’s sense of self, as they involve what people value, how 
they think and feel about things, what they like to do, and, basically, 
what they are like most every day throughout much of their lives. 

Table 7.4 


Five-Factor Model: There are hundreds of different personality 
traits, and all of these traits can be organized into the broad 
dimensions referred to as the Five-Factor Model (John, Naumann, 
& Soto, 2008). These five broad domains include Openness, 
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism 
(Think OCEAN to remember). This applies to traits that you may use 
to describe yourself. Table 7.4 provides illustrative traits for low and 
high scores on the five domains of this model of personality. 

Does personality change throughout adulthood? Previously the 
answer was no, but contemporary research shows that although 
some people’s personalities are relatively stable over time, others’ 
are not (Lucas & Donnellan, 2011; Roberts & Mroczek, 2008). 
Longitudinal studies reveal average changes during adulthood in the 
expression of some traits (e.g., neuroticism and openness decrease 
with age and conscientiousness increases) and individual 
differences in these patterns due to idiosyncratic life events (e.g., 
divorce, illness). Longitudinal research also suggests that adult 
personality traits, such as conscientiousness, predict important life 
outcomes including job success, health, and longevity (Friedman et 
al., 1993; Roberts, Kuncel, Shiner, Caspi, & Goldberg, 2007). 

The Harvard Health Letter (2012) identifies research correlations 
between conscientiousness and lower blood pressure, lower rates of 
diabetes and stroke, fewer joint problems, being less likely to engage 
in harmful behaviors, being more likely to stick to healthy behaviors, 
and more likely to avoid stressful situations. Conscientiousness also 
appears related to career choices, friendships, and stability of 
marriage. Lastly, a person possessing both self-control and 
organizational skills, both related to conscientiousness, may 
withstand the effects of aging better and have stronger cognitive 
skills than one who does not possess these qualities. 


Attachment in Young Adulthood 

Hazan and Shaver (1987) described the attachment styles of adults, 
using the same three general categories proposed by Ainsworth’s 
research on young children: secure, avoidant, and anxious/
ambivalent. Hazan and Shaver developed three brief paragraphs 
describing the three adult attachment styles. Adults were then 
asked to think about romantic relationships they were in and select 
the paragraph that best described the way they felt, thought, and 
behaved in these relationships (See Table 7.5). 

Table 7.5 

Bartholomew (1990) challenged the categorical view of attachment 
in adults and suggested that adult attachment was best described 
as varying along two dimensions; attachment related-anxiety and 
attachment-related avoidance. Attachment-related anxiety refers 
to the extent to which an adult worries about whether their partner 
really loves them. Those who score high on this dimension fear 
that their partner will reject or abandon them (Fraley, Hudson, 
Heffernan, & Segal, 2015). Attachment-related avoidance refers to 
whether an adult can open up to others, and whether they trust 
and feel they can depend on others. Those who score high on 
attachment-related avoidance are uncomfortable with opening up 


and may fear that such dependency may limit their sense of 
autonomy (Fraley et al., 2015). According to Bartholomew (1990) 
this would yield four possible attachment styles in adults; secure, 
dismissing, preoccupied, and fearful-avoidant (see Figure 7.22) 

Figure 7.22 

Securely attached adults score lower on both dimensions. They are 
comfortable trusting their partners and do not worry excessively 
about their partner’s love for them. Adults with a dismissing style 
score low on attachment-related anxiety, but higher on 
attachment-related avoidance. Such adults dismiss the importance 
of relationships. They trust themselves but do not trust others, thus 
they do not share their dreams, goals, and fears with others. They 
do not depend on other people and feel uncomfortable when they 
have to do so. 

Those with a preoccupied attachment are low in attachment-
related avoidance, but high in attachment-related anxiety. Such 
adults are often prone to jealousy and worry that their partner does 


not love them as much as they need to be loved. Adults whose 
attachment style is fearful-avoidant score high on both attachment-
related avoidance and attachment-related anxiety. These adults 
want close relationships, but do not feel comfortable getting 
emotionally close to others. They have trust issues with others 
and often do not trust their own social skills in maintaining 
relationships. 

Research on attachment in adulthood has found that: 

Adults with insecure attachments report lower satisfaction in 
their relationships (Butzer, & Campbell, 2008; Holland, Fraley, 
& Roisman, 2012). 
Those high in attachment-related anxiety report more daily 
conflict in their relationships (Campbell, Simpson, Boldry, & 
Kashy, 2005). 
Those with avoidant attachment exhibit less support to their 
partners (Simpson, Rholes, Oriña, & Grich, 2002). 
Young adults show greater attachment-related anxiety than do 
middle-aged or older adults (Chopik, Edelstein, & Fraley, 2013). 
Some studies report that young adults show more attachment-
related avoidance (Schindler, Fagundes, & Murdock, 2010), 
while other studies find that middle-aged adults show higher 
avoidance than younger or older adults (Chopik et al., 2013). 
Young adults with more secure and positive relationships with 
their parents make the transition to adulthood more easily 
than do those with more insecure attachments (Fraley, 2013). 
Young adults with secure attachments and authoritative 
parents were less likely to be depressed than those with 
authoritarian or permissive parents or who experienced an 
avoidant or ambivalent attachment (Ebrahimi, Amiri, 
Mohamadlou, & Rezapur, 2017). 


Do people with certain attachment styles attract those with 
similar styles? When people are asked what kinds of psychological 
or behavioral qualities they are seeking in a romantic partner, a 


large majority of people indicate that they are seeking someone 
who is kind, caring, trustworthy, and understanding, that is the 
kinds of attributes that characterize a “secure” caregiver (Chappell 
& Davis, 1998). However, we know that people do not always end up 
with others who meet their ideals. Are secure people more likely to 
end up with secure partners, and, vice versa, are insecure people 
more likely to end up with insecure partners? The majority of the 
research that has been conducted to date suggests that the answer 
is “yes.” Frazier, Byer, Fischer, Wright, and DeBord (1996) studied 
the attachment patterns of more than 83 heterosexual couples and 
found that, if the man was relatively secure, the woman was also 
likely to be secure. 

One important question is whether these findings exist because 
(a) secure people are more likely to be attracted to other secure 
people, (b) secure people are likely to create security in their 
partners over time, or (c) some combination of these possibilities. 
Existing empirical research strongly supports the first alternative. 
For example, when people have the opportunity to interact with 
individuals who vary in security in a speed-dating context, they 
express a greater interest in those who are higher insecurity than 
those who are more insecure (McClure, Lydon, Baccus, & Baldwin, 
2010). However, there is also some evidence that people’s 
attachment styles mutually shape one another in close 
relationships. For example, in a longitudinal study, Hudson, Fraley, 
Vicary, and Brumbaugh (2012) found that, if one person in a 
relationship experienced a change in security, his or her partner 
was likely to experience a change in the same direction. 

Do early experiences as children shape adult attachment? The 
majority of research on this issue is retrospective; that is, it relies 
on adults’ reports of what they recall about their childhood 
experiences. This kind of work suggests that secure adults are more 
likely to describe their early childhood experiences with their 
parents as being supportive, loving, and kind (Hazan & Shaver, 1987). 
A number of longitudinal studies are emerging that demonstrate 
prospective associations between early attachment experiences and 


adult attachment styles and/or interpersonal functioning in 
adulthood. For example, Fraley, Roisman, Booth-LaForce, Owen, 
and Holland (2013) found in a sample of more than 700 individuals 
studied from infancy to adulthood that maternal sensitivity across 
development prospectively predicted security at age 18. Simpson, 
Collins, Tran, and Haydon (2007) found that attachment security, 
assessed in infancy in the strange situation, predicted peer 
competence in grades one to three, which, in turn, predicted the 
quality of friendship relationships at age 16, which, in turn, 
predicted the expression of positive and negative emotions in their 
adult romantic relationships at ages 20 to 23. 

It is easy to come away from such findings with the mistaken 
assumption that early experiences “determine” later outcomes. To 
be clear, attachment theorists assume that the relationship between 
early experiences and subsequent outcomes is probabilistic, not 
deterministic. Having supportive and responsive experiences with 
caregivers early in life is assumed to set the stage for positive social 
development, but that does not mean that attachment patterns are 
set in stone. In short, even if an individual has far from optimal 
experiences in early life, attachment theory suggests that it is 
possible for that individual to develop well-functioning adult 
relationships through a number of corrective experiences, including 
relationships with siblings, other family members, teachers, and 


close friends. Security is best viewed as a culmination of a person’s 
attachment history rather than a reflection of his or her early 
experiences alone. Those early experiences are considered 
important, not because they determine a person’s fate, but because 
they provide the foundation for subsequent experiences. 

Relationships with Parents and Siblings 


In early adulthood, the parent-child relationship has to transition 
toward a relationship between two adults. This involves a 
reappraisal of the relationship by both parents and young adults. 

One of the biggest challenges for parents, especially during 
emerging adulthood, is coming to terms with the adult status of 
their children. Aquilino (2006) suggests that parents who are 
reluctant or unable to do so may hinder young adults’ identity 
development. This problem becomes more pronounced when young 
adults still reside with their parents. Arnett (2004) reported that 
leaving home often helped promote psychological growth and 
independence in early adulthood. 

Sibling relationships are one of the longest-lasting bonds in 
people’s lives. Yet, there is little research on the nature of sibling 
relationships in adulthood (Aquilino, 2006). What is known is that 
the nature of these relationships change, as adults have a choice as 
to whether they will maintain a close bond and continue to be a part 
of the life of a sibling. Siblings must make the same reappraisal of 
each other as adults, as parents have to with their adult children. 
Research has shown a decline in the frequency of interactions 
between siblings during early adulthood, as presumably peers, 
romantic relationships, and children become more central to the 
lives of young adults. Aquilino (2006) suggests that the task in early 
adulthood may be to maintain enough of a bond so that there will 
be a foundation for this relationship in later life. Those who are 
successful can often move away from the “older-younger” sibling 


conflicts of childhood, toward a more equal relationship between 
two adults. Siblings that were close to each other in childhood 
are typically close in adulthood (Dunn, 1984, 2007), and in fact, it 
is unusual for siblings to develop closeness for the first time in 
adulthood. Overall, the majority of adult sibling relationships are 
close (Cicirelli, 2009). 

Erikson: Intimacy vs. Isolation 

Erikson’s (1950, 1968) sixth stage focuses on establishing intimate 
relationships or risking social isolation. Intimate relationships are 
more difficult if one is still struggling with identity. 

Achieving a sense of identity is a life-long process, as there are 
periods of identity crisis and stability. However, once identity is 
established intimate relationships can be pursued. These intimate 
relationships include acquaintanceships and friendships, but also 
the more important close relationships, which are the long-term 
romantic relationships that we develop with another person, for 
instance, in a marriage (Hendrick & Hendrick, 2000). 

Factors influencing Attraction 

Because most of us enter into a close relationship at some point, it is 
useful to know what psychologists have learned about the principles 
of liking and loving. A major interest of psychologists is the study of 
interpersonal attraction, or what makes people like, and even love, 
each other. 

Similarity: One important factor in attraction is a perceived 
similarity in values and beliefs between the partners (Davis & 
Rusbult, 2001). The similarity is important for relationships because 
it is more convenient if both partners like the same activities and 


because similarity supports one’s values. We can feel better about 
ourselves and our choice of activities if we see that our partner also 
enjoys doing the same things that we do. Having others like and 
believe in the same things we do makes us feel validated in our beliefs.
This is referred to as consensual validation and is an important 
aspect of why we are attracted to others. 

Self-Disclosure: Liking is also enhanced by self-disclosure, the 
tendency to communicate frequently, without fear of reprisal, and in 
an accepting and empathetic manner. Friends are friends because we 
can talk to them openly about our needs and goals and because they 
listen and respond to our needs (Reis & Aron, 2008). However, self-
disclosure must be balanced. If we open up about the concerns that 
are important to us, we expect our partner to do the same in return. 
If the self-disclosure is not reciprocal, the relationship may not last. 

Proximity: Another important determinant of liking is proximityor the extent to which people are physically near us. Research has 
found that we are more likely to develop friendships with people 
who are nearby, for instance, those who live in the same dorm that 


we do, and even with people who just happen to sit nearer to us in 
our classes (Back, Schmukle, & Egloff, 2008). 

Proximity has its effect on liking through the principle of mere 
exposure, which is the tendency to prefer stimuli (including, but not 
limited to people) that we have seen more frequently. The effect of 
mere exposure is powerful and occurs in a wide variety of situations. 
Infants tend to smile at a photograph of someone they have seen 
before more than they smile at a photograph of someone they are 
seeing for the first time (Brooks-Gunn & Lewis, 1981), and people 
prefer side-to-side reversed images of their own faces over their 
normal (nonreversed) face, whereas their friends prefer their 
normal face over the reversed one (Mita, Dermer, & Knight, 1977). 
This is expected on the basis of mere exposure since people see 
their own faces primarily in mirrors, and thus are exposed to the 
reversed face more often. 

 


Mere exposure may well have an evolutionary basis. We have an 
initial fear of the unknown, but as things become familiar, they 
seem more similar and safer, and thus produce more positive affect 
and seem less threatening and dangerous (Harmon-Jones & Allen, 
2001; Freitas, Azizian, Travers, & Berry, 2005). When the stimuli are 
people, there may well be an added effect. Familiar people become 
more likely to be seen as part of the ingroup rather than the 
outgroup, and this may lead us to like them more. Zebrowitz and 
her colleagues found that we like people of our own race in part 
because they are perceived as similar to us (Zebrowitz, Bornstad, & 
Lee, 2007). 

Friendships 


In our twenties, intimacy needs may be met in friendships rather 
than with partners. This is especially true in the United States today 


as many young adults postpone making long-term commitments 
to partners, either in marriage or in cohabitation. The kinds of 
friendships shared by women tend to differ from those shared by 
men (Tannen, 1990). Friendships between men are more likely to 
involve sharing information, providing solutions, or focusing on 
activities rather than discussion problems or emotions. Men tend 
to discuss opinions or factual information or spend time together 
in an activity of mutual interest. Friendships between women are 
more likely to focus on sharing weaknesses, emotions, or problems. 
Women talk about difficulties they are having in other relationships 
and express their sadness, frustrations, and joys. These differences 
in approaches lead to problems when men and women come 
together. She may want to vent about a problem she is having; he 
may want to provide a solution and move on to some activity. But 
when he offers a solution, she thinks he does not care. Friendships 
between men and women become more difficult because of the 
unspoken question about whether friendships will lead to romantic 
involvement. Consequently, friendships may diminish once a person 
has a partner or single friends may be replaced with a couple of 
friends. 

Love 

Sternberg (1988) suggests that there are three main components 
of love: Passion, intimacy, and commitment (see Figure 7.25). Love 
relationships vary depending on the presence or absence of each of 
these components. Passion refers to the intense, physical attraction 
partners feel toward one another. Intimacy involves the ability the 
share feelings, psychological closeness and personal thoughts with the 
other. Commitment is the conscious decision to stay together. Passion 
can be found in the early stages of a relationship, but intimacy 
takes time to develop because it is based on the knowledge of the 
partner. Once intimacy has been established, partners may resolve 


to stay in the relationship. Although many would agree that all 
three components are important to a relationship, many love 
relationships do not consist of all three. Let’s look at other 
possibilities. 

Liking: In this relationship, intimacy or knowledge of the other and 
a sense of closeness is present. Passion and commitment, however, 
are not. Partners feel free to be themselves and disclose personal 
information. They may feel that the other person knows them well 
and can be honest with them and let them know if they think the 
person is wrong. These partners are friends. However, being told 
that your partner “thinks of you as a friend” can be a devastating 
blow if you are attracted to them and seeking a romantic 
involvement. 

Infatuation: Perhaps, this is Sternberg’s version of “love at first 
sight”. Infatuation consists of an immediate, intense physical 
attraction to someone. A person who is infatuated finds it hard to 
think of anything but the other person. Brief encounters are played 
over and over in one’s head; it may be difficult to eat and there may 
be a rather constant state of arousal. Infatuation is rather short-
lived, however, lasting perhaps only a matter of months or as long as 
a year or so. It tends to be based on physical attraction and an image 
of what one “thinks” the other is all about. 

Fatuous Love: However, some people who have a strong physical 


attraction push for commitment early in the relationship. Passion 
and commitment are aspects of fatuous love. There is no intimacy 
and the commitment is premature. Partners rarely talk seriously or 
share their ideas. They focus on their intense physical attraction 
and yet one, or both, is also talking of making a lasting commitment. 
Sometimes this is out of a sense of insecurity and a desire to make 
sure the partner is locked into the relationship. 

Empty Love: This type of love may be found later in a relationship 
or in a relationship that was formed to meet needs other than 
intimacy or passion, including financial needs, childrearing 
assistance, or attaining/maintaining status. Here the partners are 
committed to staying in the relationship for the children, because 
of a religious conviction, or because there are no alternatives. 
However, they do not share ideas or feelings with each other and 
have no physical attraction for one another. 

Romantic Love: Intimacy and passion are components of 
romantic love, but there is no commitment. The partners spend 
much time with one another and enjoy their closeness, but have not 
made plans to continue. This may be true because they are not in a 
position to make such commitments or because they are looking for 
passion and closeness and are afraid it will die out if they commit to 
one another and start to focus on other kinds of obligations. 

Companionate Love: Intimacy and commitment are the hallmarks 
of companionate love. Partners love and respect one another and 
they are committed to staying together. However, their physical 
attraction may have never been strong or may have just died out 
over time. Nevertheless, partners are good friends and committed 
to one another. 

Consummate Love: Intimacy, passion, and commitment are 
present in consummate love. This is often perceived by western 
cultures as “the ideal” type of love. The couple shares passion; the 
spark has not died, and the closeness is there. They feel like best 
friends, as well as lovers, and they are committed to staying 
together. 


Adult Lifestyles 

Singlehood: Being single is the most common lifestyle for people 
in their early 20s, and there has been an increase in the number 
of adults staying single. In 1960, only about 1 in 10 adults age 25 or 
older had never been married, in 2012 that had risen to 1 in 5 (Wang 
& Parker, 2014). While just over half (53%) of unmarried adults say 
they would eventually like to get married, 32 percent are not sure, 
and 13 percent do not want to get married. It is projected that by the 
time current young adults reach their mid-40s and 50s, almost 25% 
of them may not have married. The U.S. is not the only country to 
see a rise in the number of single adults. 

Table 7.6 lists some of the reasons young adults give for staying 
single. In addition, adults are marrying later in life, cohabitating, 
and raising children outside of marriage in greater numbers than in 
previous generations. Young adults also have other priorities, such 
as education, and establishing their careers. This may be reflected 
by changes in attitudes about the importance of marriage. In a 
recent Pew Research survey of Americans, respondents were asked 
to indicate which of the following statements came closer to their 
own views: 

“Society is better off if people make marriage and having 
children a priority.” 
“Society is just as well off if people have priorities other than 
marriage and children” 



Slightly more adults endorsed the second statement (50%) than 
those who chose the first (46%), with the remainder either selecting 
neither, both equally or not responding (Wang & Parker, 2014). 
Young adults age 18-29 were more likely to endorse this view than 
adults age 30 to 49; 67 percent and 53 percent respectively. In 
contrast, those aged 50 or older were more likely to endorse the 
first statement (53 percent). 

Hooking Up: United States demographic changes have 
significantly affected the romantic relationships among emerging 
and early adults. As previously described, the age for puberty has 
declined, while the times for one’s first marriage and first child 
have been pushed to older ages. This results in a “historically 
unprecedented time gap where young adults are physiologically 
able to reproduce, but not psychologically or socially ready to settle 
down and begin a family and child-rearing,” (Garcia, Reiber, Massey, 
& Merriwether, 2012, p. 172). Consequently, according to Bogle (2007, 
2008) traditional forms of dating have shifted to more casual 
hookups that involve uncommitted sexual encounters. 

Even though most research on hooking up involves college 
students, 70% of sexually active 12- 21-year-olds reported having 
had uncommitted sex during the past year (Grello, Welsh, Harper, 


& Dickson, 2003). Additionally, Manning, Giordano, and Longmore 
(2006) found that 61% of sexually active seventh, ninth, and eleventh 
graders reported being involved in a sexual encounter outside of a 
dating relationship. 

Friends with Benefits: Hookups are different than those 
relationships that involve continued mutual exchange. These 
relationships are often referred to as Friends with Benefits (FWB) 
or “Booty Calls.” These relationships involve friends having casual sex 
without commitment. 

Hookups do not include a friendship relationship. Bisson and 
Levine (2009) found that 60% of 125 undergraduates reported a FWB 
relationship. The concern with FWB is that one partner may feel 
more romantically invested than the other (Garcia et al., 2012). 

Hooking up Gender Differences: When asked about their 
motivation for hooking up, both males and females indicated 
physical gratification, emotional gratification, and a desire to 
initiate a romantic relationship as reasons (Garcia & Reiber, 2008). 
Although males and females are more similar than different in their 
sexual behaviors, a consistent finding among the research is that 
males demonstrate a greater permissiveness to casual sex (Oliver & 
Hyde, 1993). In another study involving 16,288 individuals across 52 
nations, males reported a greater desire of sexual partner variety 
than females, regardless of relationship status or sexual orientation 
(Schmitt et al., 2003). This difference can be attributed to gender 
role expectations for both males and females regarding sexual 
promiscuity. Additionally, the risks of sexual behavior are higher 
for females and include unplanned pregnancy, increased sexually 
transmitted diseases, and susceptibility to sexual violence (Garcia et 
al., 2012). 

Although hooking up relationships have become normalized for 
emerging adults, some research indicates that the majority of both 
sexes would prefer a more traditional romantic relationship (Garcia 
et al., 2012). Additionally, Owen and Fincham (2011) surveyed 500 
college students with experience with hookups, and 65% of women 
and 45% of men reported that they hoped their hookup encounter 


would turn into a committed relationship. Further, 51% of women 
and 42% of men reported that they tried to discuss the possibility 
of starting a relationship with their hookup partner. Casual sex 
has also been reported to be the norm among gay men, but they 
too indicate a desire for romantic and companionate relationships 
(Clarke & Nichols, 1972). 

Emotional Consequences of Hooking up: Concerns regarding 
hooking up behavior certainly are evident in the research literature. 
One significant finding is the high comorbidity of hooking up and 
substance use. Those engaging in non-monogamous sex are more 
likely to have used marijuana, cocaine, and alcohol, and the overall 
risks of sexual activity are drastically increased with the addition 
of alcohol and drugs (Garcia et al., 2012). Regret has also been 
expressed, and those who had the most regret after hooking up also 
had more symptoms of depression (Welsh, Grello, & Harper, 2006). 
Hookups were also found to lower self-esteem, increase guilt, and 
foster feelings of using someone or feeling used. Females displayed 
more negative reactions than males, and this may be due to females 
identifying more emotional involvement in sexual encounters than 
males. 

Hooking up can best be explained by a biological, psychological, 
and social perspective. Research indicates that emerging adults feel 
it is necessary to engage in hooking up behavior as part of the sexual 
script depicted in the culture and media. Additionally, they desire 
sexual gratification. However, they also want a more committed 
romantic relationship and may feel regret with uncommitted sex. 

Online Dating: The ways people are finding love has changed with 
the advent of the Internet. Nearly 50 million Americans have tried an 
online dating website or mobile app (Bryant & Sheldon, 2017). Online 
dating has also increased dramatically among those aged 18 to 24. 
Today, one in five emerging adults report using a mobile dating app, 
while in 2013 only 5% did, and 27% report having used online dating, 
almost triple the rate in 2013 (Smith & Anderson, 2016). 


As Finkel, Burnette, and Scissors (2007) found, social networking 
sites and the Internet perform three important tasks. Specifically, 
sites provide individuals with access to a database of other 
individuals who are interested in meeting someone. Dating sites 
generally reduce issues of proximity, as individuals do not have to 
be close in proximity to meet. Also, they provide a medium in which 
individuals can communicate with others. Finally, some Internet 
dating websites advertise special matching strategies, based on 
factors such as personality, hobbies, and interests, to identify the 
“perfect match” for people looking for love online. Social networking 
sites have provided opportunities for meeting others you would 
not have normally met. According to a recent survey of couples 
who met online versus offline (Brown, 2019), those who met online 
tended to have slightly different levels of education, and political 
views from their partners, but, the biggest difference was that they 
were much more likely to come from different racial and ethnic 
backgrounds (see Figure 7.27). This is not surprising as the average 
age of the couples who met online was 36, while the average age of 
couples who met offline was 51. Young adults are more likely to a 


relationship with people who are different from them, regardless of 
how they met. 

However, social networking sites can also be forums for 
unsuspecting people to be duped, as the person may not be who he 
or she says. 

Online communication differs from face-to-face interaction in a 
number of ways. In face-to-face meetings, people have many cues 
upon which to base their first impressions. A person’s looks, voice, 
mannerisms, dress, scent, and surroundings all provide information 
in face-to-face meetings, but in computer-mediated meetings, 
written messages are the only cues provided. Fantasy is used to 
conjure up images of voice, physical appearance, mannerisms, and 
so forth. The anonymity of online involvement makes it easier to 
become intimate without fear of interdependence. When online, 
people tend to disclose more intimate details about themselves 
more quickly. A shy person can open up without worrying about 
whether or not the partner is frowning or looking away. Someone 
who has been abused may feel safer in virtual relationships. It is 
easier to tell one’s secrets because there is little fear of loss. One 
can find a virtual partner who is warm, accepting, and undemanding 
(Gwinnell, 1998), and exchanges can be focused more on emotional 
attraction than physical appearance. 

To evaluate what individuals are looking for online, Menkin, 
Robles, Wiley and Gonzaga (2015) reviewed data from an 
eHarmony.com relationship questionnaire completed by a cross-
sectional representation of 5,434 new users. Their results indicated 
that users consistently valued communication and characteristics, 
such as personality and kindness over sexual attraction. 

Females valued communication over sexual attraction, even more 
when compared to males, and older users rated sexual attraction as 
less important than younger users. Alterovitz and Mendelsohn (2011) 
analyzed 600 Internet personal ads across the lifespan and found 
that men sought physical attractiveness and offered status-related 
information more than women, while women were more selective 


than men and sought status more than men. These findings were 
consistent with previous research on gender differences regarding 
the importance of physical/sexual attraction. 

Catfishing and other forms of scamming is an increasing concern 
for those who use dating and social media sites and apps. Catfishingrefers to “a deceptive activity involving the creation of a fake online 
profile for deceptive purposes” (Smith, Smith, & Blazka, 2017, p. 33). 
Notre Dame University linebacker Manti Ta’o fell victim to a 
catfishing scam. The young woman “Kekua” who he had struck up an 
online relationship with was a hoax, and he was not the first person 
to have been scammed by this fictitious woman. A number of US 
states have passed legislation to address online impersonation, from 
stealing the information and creating a fake account of a real person 
to the creation of a fictitious persona with the intent to defraud or 
harm others (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2017). 

Cohabitation: In American society, as well as in a number of other 
cultures, cohabitation has become increasingly commonplace 
(Gurrentz, 2018). For many emerging adults, cohabitation has 
become more commonplace than marriage, as can be seen in 
Figures 7.28. 
While marriage is still a more common living 
arrangement for those 25-34, cohabitation has increased, while 
marriage has declined, as can be seen in Figure 7.29. Gurrentz also 
found that cohabitation varies by socioeconomic status. Those who 
are married tend to have higher levels of education, and thus higher 
earnings, or earning potential. 


Copen, Daniels, and Mosher (2013) found that from 1995 to 2010 
the median length of the cohabitation relationship had increased 
regardless of whether the relationship resulted in marriage, 
remained intact, or had since dissolved. In 1995 the median length 
of the cohabitation relationship was 13 months, whereas it was 22 
months by 2010. Cohabitation for all racial/ethnic groups, except 
for Asian women increased between 1995 and 2010 (see Table 7.7). 
Forty percent of the cohabitations transitioned into marriage within 


three years, 32% were still cohabitating, and 27% of cohabitating 
relationships had dissolved within the three years. 

Three explanations have been given for the rise of cohabitation in 
Western cultures. The first notes that the increase in individualism 
and secularism, and the resulting decline in religious observance, 
has led to greater acceptance and adoption of cohabitation 
(Lesthaeghe & Surkyn, 1988). Moreover, the more people view 
cohabitating couples, the more normal this relationship becomes, 
and the more couples who will then cohabitate. Thus, cohabitation 
is both a cause and the effect of greater cohabitation.Three 
explanations have been given for the rise of cohabitation in Western 
cultures. The first notes that the increase in individualism and 
secularism, and the resulting decline in religious observance, has 
led to greater acceptance and adoption of cohabitation (Lesthaeghe 
& Surkyn, 1988). 

A second explanation focuses on economic changes. The growth of 
industry and the modernization of many cultures have improved 
women’s social status, leading to greater gender equality and sexual 
freedom, with marriage, no longer being the only long-term 
relationship option (Bumpass, 1990). A final explanation suggests 
that the change in employment requirements, with many jobs now 
requiring more advanced education, has led to a competition 
between marriage and pursuing post-secondary education (Yu & 


Xie, 2015). This might account for the increase in the age of first 
marriage in many nations. Taken together, the greater acceptance 
of premarital sex, and the economic and educational changes would 
lead to a transition in relationships. Overall, cohabitation may 
become a step in the courtship processor may, for some, replace 
marriage altogether. 

Similar increases in cohabitation have also occurred in other 
industrialized countries. For example, rates are high in Great 
Britain, Australia, Sweden, Denmark, and Finland. In fact, more 
children in Sweden are born to cohabiting couples than married 
couples. The lowest rates of cohabitation in industrialized countries 
are in Ireland, Italy, and Japan (Benokraitis, 2005). 

Cohabitation in Non-Western Cultures, The Philippines and 
China: Similar to other nations, young people in the Philippines 
are more likely to delay marriage, to cohabitate, and to engage 
in premarital sex as compared to previous generations (Williams, 
Kabamalan, & Ogena, 2007). 

Despite these changes, many young people are still not in favor of 
these practices. Moreover, there is still a persistence of traditional 
gender norms as there are stark differences in the acceptance of 
sexual behavior out of wedlock for men and women in Philippine 
society. Young men are given greater freedom. In China, young 
adults are cohabitating in higher numbers than in the past (Yu & Xie, 
2015). Unlike many Western cultures, in China adults with higher, 
rather than lower, levels of education are more likely to cohabitate. 
Yu and Xie suggest this may be due to seeing cohabitation as being 
a more “innovative” behavior and that those who are more highly 
educated may have had more exposure to Western culture. 

Marriage Worldwide: Cohen (2013) reviewed data assessing most 
of the world’s countries and found that marriage has declined 
universally during the last several decades. This decline has 
occurred in both poor and rich countries, however, the countries 
with the biggest drops in marriage were mostly rich: France, Italy, 
Germany, Japan, and the U.S. Cohen states that the decline is not 


only due to individuals delaying marriage but also because of high 
rates of non- marital cohabitation. Delayed or reduced marriage 
is associated with higher income and lower fertility rates that are 
reflected worldwide. 

Marriage in the United States: In 1960, 72% of adults age 18 or 
older were married, in 2010 this had dropped to barely half (Wang 
& Taylor, 2011). At the same time, the age of first marriage has 
been increasing for both men and women. In 1960, the average 
age for first marriage was 20 for women and 23 for men. By 2010 
this had increased to 26.5 for women and nearly 29 for men (see 
Figure 7.30). Many of the explanations for increases in singlehood 
and cohabitation previously given can also account for the drop and 
delay in marriage. 

Same-Sex Marriage: On June 26, 2015, the United States Supreme 
Court ruled that the Constitution guarantees same-sex marriage. 
The decision indicated that limiting marriage to only heterosexual 
couples violated the 14th amendment’s guarantee of equal 
protection under the law. This ruling occurred 11 years after same-
sex marriage was first made legal in Massachusetts, and at the time 
of the high court decision, 36 states and the District of Columbia 
had legalized same-sex marriage. Worldwide, 29 countries currently 


have national laws allowing gays and lesbians to marry (Pew 
Research Center, 2019). As can be seen in Table 7.8, these countries 
are located mostly in Europe and the Americas. 

Cultural Influences on Marriage: Many cultures have both explicit 
and unstated rules that specify who is an appropriate mate. 
Consequently, mate selection is not completely left to the individual. 
Rules of endogamy indicate the groups we should marry within and 
those we should not marry in (Witt, 2009). For example, many 
cultures specify that people marry within their own race, social 
class, age group, or religion. Endogamy reinforces the cohesiveness 
of the group. Additionally, these rules encourage homogamy or 
marriage between people who share social characteristics. The 
majority of marriages in the U. S. are homogamous with respect to 
race, social class, age and to a lesser extent, religion. Homogamy is 
also seen in couples with similar personalities and interests. 

Arranged Marriages and Elopement: Historically, marriage was 
not a personal choice, but one made by one’s family. Arranged 
marriages often ensured proper transference of a family’s wealth 
and the support of ethnic and religious customs. Such marriages 
were a marriage of families rather than of individuals. In Western 
Europe, starting in the 18th century the notion of personal choice in 
a marital partner slowly became the norm. Arranged marriages were 
seen as “traditional” and marriages based on love “modern”. Many 


of these early “love” marriages were obtained by eloping (Thornton, 
2005). 

Around the world, more and more young couples are choosing 
their partners, even in nations where arranged marriages are still 
the norm, such as India and Pakistan. Desai and Andrist (2010) found 
that only 5% of the women surveyed, aged 25-49, had a primary role 
in choosing their partner. Only 22% knew their partner for more 
than one month before they were married. However, the younger 
cohort of women was more likely to have been consulted by their 
families before their partner was chosen than were the older cohort, 
suggesting that family views are changing about personal choice. 
Allendorf (2013) reports that this 5% figure may also underestimate 
young people’s choice, as only women were surveyed. Many families 
in India are increasingly allowing sons to veto power over the 
parents’ choice of his future spouse, and some families give 
daughters the same say. 

Marital Arrangements in India: As the number of arranged 
marriages in India is declining, elopement is increasing. Allendorf’s 
(2013) study of a rural village in India, describes the elopement 
process. In many cases, the female leaves her family home and 
goes to the male’s home, where she stays with him and his parents. 
After a few days, a member of his family will inform her family 
of her whereabouts and gain consent for the marriage. In other 
cases, where the couple anticipates some degree of opposition to 
the union, the couple may run away without the knowledge of either 
family, often going to a relative of the male. After a few days, the 
couple comes back to the home of his parents, where at that point 
consent is sought from both families. Although, in some cases, 
families may sever all ties with their child or encourage him or her 
to abandon the relationship, typically, they agree to the union as the 
couple has spent time together overnight. Once consent has been 
given, the couple lives with his family and are considered married. A 
more formal ceremony takes place a few weeks or months later. 

Arranged marriages are less common in the more urban regions 
of India than they are outside of the cities. In rural regions, often the 


family farm is the young person’s only means of employment. Thus, 
going against family choices may carry bigger consequences. Young 
people who live in urban centers have more employment options. 
As a result, they are often less economically dependent on their 
families and may feel freer to make their own choices. Thornton 
(2005) suggests these changes are also being driven by mass media, 
international travel, and general Westernization of ideas. Besides 
India, China, Nepal, and several nations in Southeast Asia have seen 
a decline in the number of arranged marriages, and an increase 
in elopement or couples choosing their own partners with their 
families’ blessings (Allendorf, 2013). 

Predictors of Marital Harmony: Advice on how to improve one’s 
marriage is centuries old. One of today’s experts on marital 
communication is John Gottman. Gottman (1999) differs from many 
marriage counselors in his belief that having a good marriage does 
not depend on compatibility. Rather, the way that partners 
communicate with one another is crucial. At the University of 
Washington in Seattle, Gottman has measured the physiological 
responses of thousands of couples as they discuss issues of 
disagreement. Fidgeting is one’s chair, leaning closer to or further 
away from the partner while speaking, and increases in respiration 
and heart rate are all recorded and analyzed along with videotaped 
recordings of the partners’ exchanges. Gottman believes he can 
accurately predict whether or not a couple will stay together by 
analyzing their communication. In marriages destined to fail, 
partners engage in the “marriage killers”: Contempt, criticism, 
defensiveness, and stonewalling. Each of these undermines the 
politeness and respect that healthy marriages require. Stonewalling, 
or shutting someone out, is the strongest sign that a relationship is 
destined to fail. 

Gottman, Carrere, Buehlman, Coan, and Ruckstuhl (2000) 
researched the perceptions newlyweds had about their partner and 
marriage. The Oral History Interview used in the study, which looks 
at eight variables in marriage including Fondness/affection, we-


ness, expansiveness/ expressiveness, negativity, disappointment, 
and three aspects of conflict resolution (chaos, volatility, glorifying 
the struggle), was able to predict the stability of the marriage with 
87% accuracy at the four to six year-point and 81% accuracy at the 
seven to nine year-point. Gottman (1999) developed workshops for 
couples to strengthen their marriages based on the results of the 
Oral History Interview. Interventions include increasing the positive 
regard for each other, strengthening their friendship, and improving 
communication and conflict resolution patterns. 

Accumulated Positive Deposits: When there is a positive balance 
of relationship deposits this can help the overall relationship in 
times of conflict. For instance, some research indicates that a 
husband’s level of enthusiasm in everyday marital interactions was 
related to a wife’s affection in the midst of conflict (Driver & 
Gottman, 2004), showing that being pleasant and making deposits 
can change the nature of the conflict. Also, Gottman and Levenson 
(1992) found that couples rated as having more pleasant 
interactions, compared with couples with less pleasant interactions, 
reported marital problems as less severe, higher marital 
satisfaction, better physical health, and less risk for divorce. Finally, 
Janicki, Kamarck, Shiffman, and Gwaltney (2006) showed that the 
intensity of conflict with a spouse predicted marital satisfaction 
unless there was a record of positive partner interactions, in which 
case the conflict did not matter as much. 

Again, it seems as though having a positive balance through prior 
positive deposits helps to keep relationships strong even in the 
midst of conflict. 

Intimate Partner Abuse 

Violence in romantic relationships is a significant concern for 
women in early adulthood as females aged 18 to 34 generally 
experience the highest rates of intimate partner violence. 


According to the most recent Violence Policy Center (2018) study, 
more than 1,800 women were murdered by men in 2016. The study 
found that nationwide, 93% of women killed by men were murdered 
by someone they knew, and guns were the most common weapon 
used. The national rate of women murdered by men in single 
victim/single offender incidents dropped 24%, from 1.57 per 
100,000 in 1996 to 1.20 per 100,000 in 2016. However, since reaching 
a low of 1.08 per 100,000 women in 2014, the 2016 rate increased by 
11%. 

Intimate partner violence is often divided into situational couple 
violence, which is the violence that results when heated conflict 
escalates, and intimate terrorism, in which one partner consistently 
uses fear and violence to dominate the other (Bosson, et al., 2019). 
Men and women equally use and experience situational couple 
violence, while men are more likely to use intimate terrorism than 
are women. Consistent with this, a national survey described below, 
found that female victims of intimate partner violence experience 
different patterns of violence, such as rape, severe physical 
violence, and stalking than male victims, who most often 
experienced more slapping, shoving, and pushing. 

The last National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey 
(NISVS) was conducted in 2015 (Smith et al., 2018). The NISVS 


examines the prevalence of intimate partner violence, sexual 
violence, and stalking among women and men in the United States 
over the respondent’s lifetime and during the 12 months before the 
interview. A total of 5,758 women and 4,323 men completed the 
survey. Based on the results, women are disproportionately affected 
by intimate partner violence, sexual violence, and stalking. Results 
included: 

Nearly 1 in 3 women and 1 in 6 men experienced some form of 
contact sexual violence during their lifetime. 
Nearly 1 in 5 women and 1 in 39 men have been raped in their 
lifetime. 
Approximately 1 in 6 women and 1 in 10 men experienced 
sexual coercion (e.g., sexual pressure from someone in 
authority, or being worn down by requests for sex). 
Almost 1 in 5 women have been the victim of severe physical 
violence by an intimate partner, while 1 in 7 men have 
experienced the same. 
1 in 6 women has been stalked during their lifetime, compared 
to 1 in 19 men. 
More than 1 in 4 women and more than 1 in 10 men have 
experienced contact sexual violence, physical violence, or 
stalking by an intimate partner and reported significant short- 
or long-term impacts, such as post-traumatic stress disorder 
symptoms and injury. 
An estimated 1 in 3 women experienced at least one act of 
psychological aggression by an intimate partner during their 
lifetime. 
Men and women who experienced these forms of violence 
were more likely to report frequent headaches, chronic pain, 
difficulty with sleeping, activity limitations, poor physical 
health, and poor mental health than men and women who did 
not experience these forms of violence. 



Parenthood 

Parenthood is undergoing changes in the United States and 
elsewhere in the world. Children are less likely to be living with 
both parents, and women in the United States have fewer children 
than they did previously. The average fertility rate of women in the 
United States was about seven children in the early 1900s and has 
remained relatively stable at 2.1 since the 1970s (Hamilton, Martin, 
& Ventura, 2011; Martinez, Daniels, & Chandra, 2012). Not only are 
parents having fewer children, but the context of parenthood has 
also changed. Parenting outside of marriage has increased 
dramatically among most socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic groups, 
although college-educated women are substantially more likely to 
be married at the birth of a child than are mothers with less 
education (Dye, 2010). 

People are having children at older ages, too. This is not surprising 
given that many of the age markers for adulthood have been 
delayed, including marriage, completing education, establishing 
oneself at work, and gaining financial independence. In 2014 the 


average age for American first-time mothers was 26.3 years (CDC, 
2015a). The birth rate for women in their early 20s has declined in 
recent years, while the birth rate for women in their late 30s has 
risen. In 2011, 40% of births were to women ages 30 and older. For 
Canadian women, birth rates are even higher for women in their late 
30s than in their early 20s. In 2011, 52% of births were to women 
ages 30 and older, and the average first-time Canadian mother was 
28.5 years old (Cohn, 2013). Improved birth control methods have 
also enabled women to postpone motherhood. 

Despite the fact that young people are more often delaying 
childbearing, most 18- to 29-year-olds want to have children and 
say that being a good parent is one of the most important things in 
life (Wang & Taylor, 2011). 

Influences on Parenting: Parenting is a complex process in which 
parents and children influence on another. There are many reasons 
that parents behave the way they do. The multiple influences on 
parenting are still being explored. Proposed influences on parenting 
include Parent characteristics, child characteristics, and contextual 
can sociocultural characteristics. (Belsky, 1984; Demick, 1999). 

Parent Characteristics: Parents bring unique traits and qualities 
to the parenting relationship that affect their decisions as parents. 
These characteristics include the age of the parent, gender, beliefs, 
personality, developmental history, knowledge about parenting and 
child development, and mental and physical health. Parents’ 
personalities affect parenting behaviors. Mothers and fathers who 
are more agreeable, conscientious, and outgoing are warmer and 
provide more structure to their children. Parents who are more 
agreeable, less anxious, and less negative also support their 
children’s autonomy more than parents who are anxious and less 
agreeable (Prinzie, Stams, Dekovic, Reijntes, & Belsky, 2009). Parents 
who have these personality traits appear to be better able to 
respond to their children positively and provide a more consistent, 
structured environment for their children. 

Parents’ developmental histories, or their experiences as children, 


also affect their parenting strategies. Parents may learn parenting 
practices from their own parents. Fathers whose own parents 
provided monitoring, consistent and age-appropriate discipline, 
and warmth was more likely to provide this constructive parenting 
to their own children (Kerr, Capaldi, Pears, & Owen, 2009). Patterns 
of negative parenting and ineffective discipline also appear from one 
generation to the next. However, parents who are dissatisfied with 
their own parents’ approach may be more likely to change their 
parenting methods with their own children. 

Child Characteristics: Parenting is bidirectional. Not only do 
parents affect their children, but children also influence their parents.
Child characteristics, such as gender, birth order, temperament, and 
health status, affect parenting behaviors and roles. For example, an 
infant with an easy temperament may enable parents to feel more 
effective, as they are easily able to soothe the child and elicit smiling 
and cooing. On the other hand, a cranky or fussy infant elicits fewer 
positive reactions from his or her parents and may result in parents 
feeling less effective in the parenting role (Eisenberg et al., 2008). 
Over time, parents of more difficult children may become more 
punitive and less patient with their children (Clark, Kochanska, & 
Ready, 2000; Eisenberg et al., 1999; Kiff, Lengua, & Zalewski, 2011). 


Parents who have a fussy, difficult child are less satisfied with their 
marriages and have greater challenges in balancing work and family 
roles (Hyde, Else-Quest, & Goldsmith, 2004). Thus, child 
temperament, as previously discussed in chapter 3, is one of the 
child characteristics that influence how parents behave with their 
children. 

Another child characteristic is the gender of the child. Parents 
respond differently to boys and girls. Parents often assign different 
household chores to their sons and daughters. Girls are more often 
responsible for caring for younger siblings and household chores, 
whereas boys are more likely to be asked to perform chores outside 
the home, such as mowing the lawn (Grusec, goodnow, & Cohen, 
1996). Parents also talk differently with their sons and daughters, 
providing more scientific explanations to their sons and using more 
emotional words with their daughters (Crowley, Callanan, 
Tenenbaum, & Allen, 2001). 

Contextual Factors and Sociocultural Characteristics: The 
parent-child relationship does not occur in isolation. Sociocultural 
characteristics, including economic hardship, religion, politics, 
neighborhoods, schools, and social support, also influence 
parenting. Parents who experience economic hardship are more 
easily frustrated, depressed, and sad, and these emotional 
characteristics affect their parenting skills (Conger & Conger, 2002). 
Culture also influences parenting behaviors in fundamental ways. 
Although promoting the development of skills necessary to function 
effectively in one’s community is a universal goal of parenting, the 
specific skills necessary vary widely from culture to culture. Thus, 
parents have different goals for their children that partially depend 
on their culture (Tamis-LeMonda et al., 2008). 
Parents vary in how 
much they emphasize goals for independence and individual 
achievements, maintaining harmonious relationships, and being 
embedded in a strong network of social relationships. Other 
important contextual characteristics, such as the neighborhood, 
school, and social networks, also affect parenting, even though 
these settings do not always include both the child and the parent 


(Brofenbrenner, 1989). Culture is also a contributing contextual 
factor, as discussed previously in chapter four. For example, Latina 
mothers who perceived their neighborhood as more dangerous 
showed less warmth with their children, perhaps because of the 
greater stress associated with living a threatening environment 
(Gonzales et al., 2011). The different influences are shown in Figure 
7.35. 

References 

Allendorf, K. (2013). Schemas of marital change: From arranged 
marriages to eloping for love. Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 
453-469. 

Alterovitz, S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2011). Partner preferences across 
the life span: Online dating by older adults. Psychology of Popular 
Media Culture, 1(S), 89-95. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (Fifth Edition). Washington, D. C.: 
Author. 

American Psychological Association. (2016). Sexual orientation and 


homosexuality. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/topics/lgbt/
orientation.aspx 

Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of development 
from late teens through the twenties. American Psychologist, 55, 
469-480. 

Arnett, J. J. (2001). Conceptions of the transitions to adulthood: 
Perspectives from adolescence to midlife. Journal of Adult 
Development, 8, 133-143. 

Arnett, J. J. (2003). Conceptions of the transition to adulthood 
among emerging adults in American ethnic groups. New 
Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 100, 63–75. 

Arnett, J. J. (2004). Conceptions of the transition to adulthood 
among emerging adults in American ethnic groups. In J. J. Arnett 
& N. Galambos (Eds.), Cultural conceptions of the transition to 
adulthood: New directions in child and adolescent development. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Arnett, J. J. (2006). G. Stanley Hall’s adolescence: Brilliance and non-
sense. History of Psychology, 9, 186-197. Arnett, J.J. (2007). The 
long and leisurely route: Coming of age in Europe today. Current 
History, 106, 130-136. 

Arnett, J. J. (2011). Emerging adulthood(s): The cultural psychology 
of a new life stage. In L.A. Jensen (Ed.), Bridging cultural and 
developmental psychology: New syntheses in theory, research, and 
policy (pp. 255–275). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Arnett, J. J. (2016). Does emerging adulthood theory apply across 
social classes? National data on a persistent question. Emerging 
Adulthood, 4(4), 227-235. 

Arnett, J. J., & Taber, S. (1994). Adolescence terminable and 
interminable: When does adolescence end? Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 23, 517–537. 

Aquilino, W. S. (2006). Family relationships and support systems in 
emerging adulthood. In J. J. Arnett & J. L. Tanner (Eds.), Emerging 
adults in America: Coming of age in the 21st century (pp. 193-217). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 


Babcock, L., Gelfand, M., Small, D., & Stayn, H. (2006). Gender 
differences in the propensity to initiate negotiations. In D. De 
Cremer, M. Zelenberg, & J.K. Muringham (Eds.), Social psychology 
and economics (pp. 239-262). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B. (2008). Becoming friends 
by chance. Psychological Science, 19(5), 439–440. Bailey, J. M., & 
Pillard, R. C. (1991). A genetic study of male sexual orientation. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1089-1096. 

Bailey, J. M., Pillard, R. C., Neale, M. C. & Agyei, Y. (1993). Heritable 
factors influence sexual orientation in women. Archives of General 
Psychology, 50, 217-223. 

Baldridge, D.C., Eddleston, K.A., & Vega, J.F. (2006). Saying no to 
being uprooted: The impact of family and gender on willingness to 
relocate. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 
79, 131-149. 

Balthazart, J. (2018). Fraternal birth order effect on sexual 
orientation explained. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 115(2), 234-236. 

Bartholomew, K. (1990). Avoidance of intimacy: An attachment 
perspective. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 7, 147-178. 
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3524.61.2.226. 

Basseches, M. (1984). Dialectical thinking and adult development. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Pub. 

Bauermeister, J. A., Johns, M. M., Sandfort, T. G., Eisenberg, A., 
Grossman, A. H., & D’Augelli, A. R. (2010). Relationship trajectories 
and psychological well-being among sexual minority youth. 
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 39(10), 1148-1163. 

Belsky, J. (1984). The determinants of parenting: A process model. 
Child Development, 55, 83–96. 

Benokraitis, N. V. (2005). Marriages and families: Changes, choices, 
and constraints (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. 

Berger, K. S. (2005). The developing person through the life span (6th 
ed.). New York: Worth. 

Bisson, M. A., & Levine, T. R. (2009). Negotiating a friends with 


benefits relationship. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 66–73. 
doi:10.1007/s10508-007-9211-2 

Blanchard, R. (2001). Fraternal birth order and the maternal immune 
hypothesis of male homosexuality. Hormones and Behavior, 40, 
105-114. 

Blau, F. D., Ferber, M. A., & Winkler, A. E. (2010). The economics of 
women, men and work. (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Prentice Hall. 

Bogaert, A. F. (2015). Asexuality: What it is and why it matters. 
Journal of Sex Research, 52(4), 362-379. doi:10.1080/
00224499.2015.1015713 

Bogle, K. A. (2007). The shift from dating to hooking up in college: 
What scholars have missed. Sociology Compass, 1/2, 775– 788. 

Bogle, K. A. (2008). Hooking up: Sex, dating, and relationships on 
campus. New York, NY: New York University Press. 

Bohlin, G., & Hagekull, B. (2009). Socio-emotional development from 
infancy to young adulthood. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 
50, 592-601. 

Borgogna, N. C., McDermott, R. C., Aita, S. L., & Kridel, M. M. (2019). 
Anxiety and depression across gender and sexual minorities: 
Implications for transgender, gender nonconforming, pansexual, 
demisexual, asexual, queer and questioning individuals. 
Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity, 6(1), 54-63. 

Bosson, J. K., Vandello, J., & Buckner, C. (2019). The psychology of sex 
and gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Boundless. (2016). Physical development in adulthood. Boundles 
Psychology. Retrieved from https://www.boundless.com/
psychology/textbooks/boundless-psychology-textbook/
human-development-14/early-and- middle-adulthood-74/
physical-development-in-adulthood-287-12822/ 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1989). Ecological systems theory. In R. Vasta 
(Ed.), Annals of Child Development, Vol. 6 (pp. 187–251). Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press. 

Brooks-Gunn, J., & Lewis, M. (1981). Infant social perception: 
Responses to pictures of parents and strangers. Developmental 
Psychology, 17(5), 647–649. 


Brown, A. (2019). Couples who meet online are more diverse than 
those who meet in other ways, largely because they’re younger. Pew 
Research Center. Retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2019/06/24/couples-who-meet-online-are-more-
diverse-than-those-who-meet-in-other-ways-largely-because-
theyre-younger/ 

Bruckmuller, S., Ryan, M.K., Floor, R., & Haslam, S.A. (2014). The 
glass cliff: Examining why women occupy leadership positions in 
precarious circumstances. In S. Kumra, R. Simpson, & R.J. Burke 
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of gender in organizations (pp. 314-331). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Bryant, K. & Sheldon, P. (2017). Cyber dating in the age of mobile 
apps: Understanding motives, attitudes, and characteristics of 
users. American Communication Journal, 19(2), 1-15. 

Bumpass, L. L. (1990). What’s happening to the family? Interactions 
between demographic and institutional change. Demography, 
27(4), 483–498. 

Butzer, B., & Campbell, L. (2008). Adult attachment, sexual 
satisfaction, and relationship satisfaction: A study of married 
couples. Personal Relationships, 15, 141-154. 

Cain, S. (2012). Quiet. New York: Crown Publishing Group. 

Campbell, L., Simpson, J. A., Boldry, J., & Kashy, D. A. (2005). 
Perceptions of conflict and support in romantic relationships: 
The role of attachment anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88, 510-532. 

Carlson, N. R. (2011). Foundations of behavioral neuroscience (8th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson Education. 

Carroll, J. L. (2007). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (2nd ed.). 
Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning. 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Ceci, S. J., & Williams, W. M. (2011). Understanding current causes 
of women’s under-representation in science. Proceedings of the 


National Academy of Science of the United States of America, 108(8), 
3157-3162. doi:10.1073/pnas.1014871108 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2014). Reported STDs 
in the United States. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/std/
stats14/std-trends-508.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015a). Births and 
natality. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
births.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015b). Obesity and 
overweight. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
obesity-overweight.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). Adult obesity 
causes and consequences. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/
obesity/adult/causes.html 

Channick, R. (2019, July 9). Putting gender pay gap onto a broader 
stage. The Chicago Tribune, pp. 1-2. 

Chappell, K. D., & Davis, K. E. (1998). Attachment, partner choice, 
and perception of romantic partners: An experimental test of 
the attachment-security hypothesis. Personal Relationships, 5, 
327–342. 

Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1987). Origins and evolution of behavior 
disorders. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Chopik, W. J., Edelstein, R. S., & Fraley, R. C. (2013). From the cradle 
to the grave: Age differences in attachment from early adulthood 
to old age. Journal or Personality, 81 (2), 171-183 DOI: 10.1111/j. 
1467-6494.2012.00793 

Cicirelli, V. (2009). Sibling relationships, later life. In D. Carr (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of the life course and human development. Boston, 
MA: Cengage. 

Clark, L. A., Kochanska, G., & Ready, R. (2000). Mothers’ personality 
and its interaction with child temperament as predictors of 
parenting behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
79, 274–285. 

Clark, L. A. & Watson, D. (1999). Temperament: A new paradigm 


for trait theory. In L.A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of 
personality. NY: Guilford. 

Clarke, L., & Nichols, J. (1972). I have more fun with you than anybody.
New York, NY: St. Martin’s. 

Cohen, P. (2013). Marriage is declining globally. Can you say that?
Retrieved from https://familyinequality.wordpress.com/2013/
06/12/marriage-is-declining/ 

Cohen-Bendehan, C. C., van de Beek, C. & Berenbaum, S. A. (2005). 
Prenatal sex hormone effects on child and adult sex-typed 
behavior: Methods and findings. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 47, 230-237. 

Cohn, D. (2013). In Canada, most babies now born to women 30 and 
older. Pew Research Center. 

Conger, R. D., & Conger, K. J. (2002). Resilience in Midwestern 
families: Selected findings from the first decade of a prospective 
longitudinal study. Journal of Marriage and Family, 64, 361–373. 

Copen, C.E., Daniels, K., & Mosher, W.D. (2013) First premarital 
cohabitation in the United States: 2006–2010 National Survey of 
Family Growth. National health statistics reports; no 64. 
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 

Council of Economic Advisors. (2015). Gender pay gap: Recent trends 
and explanations. Retrieved from https://www.whitehouse.gov/
sites/default/files/docs/equal_pay_issue_brief_final.pdf 

Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Tenenbaum, H. R., & Allen, E. (2001). 
Parents explain more often to boys than to girls during shared 
scientific thinking. Psychological Science, 12, 258–261. 

Davidson, R. J. & Begley, S. (2012). The emotional life of your brain. 
New York: Penguin. 

Davis, J. L., & Rusbult, C. E. (2001). Attitude alignment in close 
relationships. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 81(1), 
65–84. 

Demick, J. (1999). Parental development: Problem, theory, method, 
and practice. In R. L. Mosher, D. J. Youngman, & J. M. Day (Eds.), 


Human development across the life span: Educational and 
psychological applications (pp. 177–199). Westport, CT: Praeger. 

Desai, S., & Andrist, L. (2010). Gender scripts and age at marriage in 
India. Demography, 47, 667-687. doi:10.1353/dem.0.0118 Desilver, 
D. (2016) Millions of young people in the US and EU are neither 
working nor learning. Pew Research Center (January 28, 2016). 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/01/28/us-eu-
neet-population/ 

Diamond, M. (2002). Sex and gender are different: Sexual identity 
and gender identity are different. Clinical Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 7(3), 320-334. 

Douglass, C. B. (2007). From duty to desire: Emerging adulthood in 
Europe and its consequences. Child Development Perspectives, 1, 
101–108. 

Driver, J., & Gottman, J. (2004). Daily marital interactions and 
positive affect during marital conflict among newlywed couples. 
Family Process, 43, 301–314. 

Dunn, J. (1984). Sibling studies and the developmental impact of 
critical incidents. In P.B. Baltes & O.G. Brim (Eds.), Life-span 
development and behavior (Vol 6). Orlando, FL: Academic Press. 

Dunn, J. (2007). Siblings and socialization. In J. E. Grusec & P. D. 
Hastings (Eds.), Handbook of socialization. New York: Guilford. 

Dye, J. L. (2010). Fertility of American women: 2008. Current 
Population Reports. Retrieved from www.census.gov/prod/
2010pubs/p20-563.pdf. 

Ebrahimi, L., Amiri, M., Mohamadlou, M., & Rezapur, R. (2017). 
Attachment stules, parenting styles, and depression. International 
Journal of Mental Health, 15, 1064-1068. 

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Shepard, S. A., Guthrie, I.K., Murphy, 
B.C., & Reiser, M. (1999). Parental reactions to children’s negative 
emotions: Longitudinal relations to quality of children’s social 
functioning. Child Development, 70, 513-534. 

Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Spinrad, T., Gershoff, E., Valiente, C., 
Losoya, S. L., Zhou, Q., Cumberland, A., Liew, J., Reiser, M., & 
Maxon, E. (2008). Understanding parent-adolescent conflict 


discussions: Concurrent and across-time prediction from youths’ 
dispositions and parenting. Monographs of the Society for Research 
in Child Development, 73, (Serial No. 290, No. 2), 1-160. 

Erikson, E. H. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton. 
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton. 

Finkel, E. J., Burnette J. L., & Scissors L. E. (2007). Vengefully ever 
after: Destiny beliefs, state attachment anxiety, and forgiveness. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 871–886. 

Fraley, R. C. (2013). Attachment through the life course. In R. Biswas-
Diener & E. Diener (Eds), Noba textbook series: Psychology. 
Champaign, IL: DEF publishers. Retrieved from nobaproject.com. 

Fraley, R. C., Hudson, N. W., Heffernan, M. E., & Segal, N. (2015). Are 
adult attachment styles categorical or dimensional? A taxometric 
analysis of general and relationship-specific attachment 
orientations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 109 (2),
354-368. 

Fraley, R. C., Roisman, G. I., Booth-LaForce, C., Owen, M. T., & 
Holland, A. S. (2013). Interpersonal and genetic origins of adult 
attachment styles: A longitudinal study from infancy to early 
adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 
8817-838. 

Frazier, P. A, Byer, A. L., Fischer, A. R., Wright, D. M., & DeBord, K. 
A. (1996). Adult attachment style and partner choice: Correlational 
and experimental findings. Personal Relationships, 3, 117–136. 

Freitas, A. L., Azizian, A., Travers, S., & Berry, S. A. (2005). The 
evaluative connotation of processing fluency: Inherently positive 
or moderated by motivational context? Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 41(6), 636–644. 

Frieden, T. (2011, January 14). Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
for the Centers for Disease Control (United States, Center for 
Disease Control). Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/su6001al.htm?s_su6001al_w 

Friedman, H. S., Tucker, J. S., Tomlinson-Keasey, C., Schwartz, J. E., 
Wingard, D. L., & Criqui, M. H. (1993). Does childhood personality 


predict longevity? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 
176–185. doi:10.1037/0022- 3514.65.1.176 

Fry, R. (2016). For the first time in the modern era, living with parents 
edges out other living arrangements for 18- to 34- year-olds.
Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center. 

Fry, R. (2018). Millennials are the largest generation in the U. S. labor 
force. Retrieved from: https://www.pewresearch.org/fact- tank/
2018/04/11/millennials-largest-generation-us-labor-force/ 

Fryar, C. D., Carroll, M. D., & Ogden, C. L. (2014). Prevalence of 
overweight, obesity, and extreme obesity among adults: United 
States, 1960-1962 through 2011-2012. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_adult_11_12/
obesity_adult_11_12.htm 

Gallup Poll Report (2016). What millennials want from work and 
life. Business Journal. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/
businessjournal/191435/millennials-work-life.aspx 

Garcia, J. R., & Reiber, C. (2008). Hook-up behavior: A 
biopsychosocial perspective. The Journal of Social, Evolutionary, 
and Cultural Psychology, 2, 192–208. 

Garcia, J. R., Reiber, C., Massey, S. G., & Merriwether, A. M. (2012). 
Sexual hookup culture: A review. Review of General Psychology, 
16(2), 161-176. doi:10.1037/a0027911 

Gates, G. J. (2011). How many people are lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender? Retrieved from 
http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/research/census-lgbt-
demographics-studies/how-many-people-are-lesbian-gay- 
bisexual-and-transgender/ 

Gonzales, N. A., Coxe, S., Roosa, M. W., White, R. M. B., Knight, 
G. P., Zeiders, K. H., & Saenz, D. (2011). Economic hardship, 
neighborhood context, and parenting: Prospective effects on 
Mexican-American adolescent’s mental health. American Journal 
of Community Psychology, 47, 98–113. doi: 10.1007/
s10464-010-9366-1 

Gottman, J. M. (1999). Couple’s handbook: Marriage Survival Kit 
Couple’s Workshop. Seattle, WA: Gottman Institute. 


Gottman, J. M., Carrere, S., Buehlman, K. T., Coan, J. A., & Ruckstuhl, 
L. (2000). Predicting marital stability and divorce in newlywed 
couples. Journal of Family Psychology, 14(1), 42-58. 

Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital processes 
predictive of later dissolution: Behavior, physiology and health. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 221–233. 

Grello, C. M., Welsh, D. P., Harper, M. S., & Dickson, J. W. (2003). 
Dating and sexual relationship trajectories and adolescent 
functioning. Adolescent & Family Health, 3, 103–112. 

Grusec, J. E., Goodnow, J. J., & Cohen, L. (1996). Household work and 
the development of concern for others. Developmental Psychology, 
32, 999–1007. 

Gurrentz, B. (2018). For young adults, cohabitation is up, and 
marriage is down. US. Census Bureau. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2018/11/cohabitaiton-
is-up-marriage-is-down-for-young-adults.html. 

Gwinnell, E. (1998). Online seductions: Falling in love with strangers 
on the Internet. New York: Johnson Publishing. 

Hales, C.M., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Ogden, C.L. (2017). 
Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: United States, 
2015–2016. NCHS data brief, no 288. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics. 

Hamilton, B. E., Martin, J. A., & Ventura, S. J. (2011). Births: 
Preliminary data for 2010. National Vital Statistics Reports, 60(2). 

Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Harmon-Jones, E., & Allen, J. J. B. (2001). The role of affect in the 
mere exposure effect: Evidence from psychophysiological and 
individual differences approaches. Personality & Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 27(7), 889–898. 

Harvard Health Letter. (2012). Raising your conscientiousness. 
Retrieved from http://www.helath.harvard.edu 

Hatfield, E., & Rapson, R. L. (2006). Love and sex: Cross-cultural 
perspectives. New York, NY: University Press of America. 

Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an 


attachment process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
52 (3), 511-524. 

Hegewisch, A., & Ellis, E. (2015). The gender wage gap by occupation 
2014 and by race and ethnicity. Washington DC: Institute for 
Women’s Policy Research. Retrieved from http://www.iwpr.org/
publications/pubs/the-gender-wage-gap-by- 
occupation-2014-and-by-race-and-ethnicity. 

Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. S. (Eds.). (2000). Close relationships: A 
sourcebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Heron, M. P., & Smith, B. L. (2007). Products – Health E Stats – 
Homepage. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved 
from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/hestats/
leadingdeath03/leadingdeath03.htm 

Hess, A. (2019). Today is the Women’s World Cup final between the US 
and Netherlands—here’s how much money is on the line. Retrieved 
from https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/04/womens-world-cup-
final-how-much-money-is-on-the- line.html 

Holland, A. S., Fraley, R. C., & Roisman, G. I. (2012). Attachment 
styles in dating couples: Predicting relationship functioning over 
time. Personal Relationships, 19, 234-246. doi: 10.1111/
j.1475-6811.2011.01350.x 

Hudson, N. W., Fraley, R. C., Vicary, A. M., & Brumbaugh, C. C. (2012). 
Attachment coregulation: A longitudinal investigation of the 
coordination in romantic partners’ attachment styles. Manuscript 
under review. 

Hyde, J. S., Bigler, R., Joel, D., Tate, C., & van Anders, S. (2019). The 
future of sex and gender in psychology: Five challenges to the 
gender binary. American Psychologist, 74(2), 171-193. 

Hyde, J. S., Else-Quest, N. M., & Goldsmith, H. H. (2004). Children’s 
temperament and behavior problems predict their employed 
mothers’ work functioning. Child Development, 75, 580–594. 

Institute for College Access & Success. (2018). Student debt and the 
class of 2017. Retrieved from https://ticas.org/posd/home. 

Janicki, D., Kamarck, T., Shiffman, S., & Gwaltney, C. (2006). 
Application of ecological momentary assessment to the study of 


marital adjustment and social interactions during daily life. 
Journal of Family Psychology, 20, 168–172. 

John, O. P., Naumann, L. P., & Soto, C. J. (2008). Paradigm shift to the 
integrative Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and 
conceptual issues. In O. P. John, R. R. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), 
Handbook of personality. Theory and research (3rd ed., pp. 114–158). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press. 301 

John, O. P., Robins, R. W., & Pervin, L. A. (2008). Handbook of 
personality. Theory and research (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press. 

Kagan, J. (2002). Behavioral inhibition as a temperamental category. 
In R.J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer, & H. H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook 
of affective sciences. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Kerr, D. C. R., Capaldi, D. M., Pears, K. C., & Owen, L. D. (2009). 
A prospective three generational study of fathers’ constructive 
parenting: Influences from family of origin, adolescent 
adjustment, and offspring temperament. Developmental 
Psychology, 45, 1257–1275. 

Kiff, C. J., Lengua, L. J., & Zalewski, M. (2011). Nature and nurturing: 
Parenting in the context of child temperament. Clinical Child 
and Family Psychology Review, 14, 251–301. doi: 10.1007/
s10567011-0093-4 

Kinsey, A., Pomeroy, W.B., & Martin, C. E. (1948). Sexual behavior in 
the human male. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders. Krebs, C., Lindquist, 
C., Warner, T., Fisher, B., & Martin, S. (2009). College women’s 
experiences with physically forced, alcohol or other drug-
enabled, and drug-facilitated sexual assault before and since 
entering college. Journal of American College Health, 57(6), 
639-649. 

Kreighbaum, A. (2019). Six figures in debt for a master’s degree. 
Retrieved from https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2019/
06/03/updated-college-scorecard-puts-spotlight-graduate-
student- borrowing 

Laursen, B., & Jensen-Campbell, L. A. (1999). The nature and 


functions of social exchange in adolescent romantic relationships. 
In W. Furman, B. B. Brown, & C. Feiring (Eds.), The development 
of romantic relationships in adolescence (pp. 50– 74). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Lesthaeghe, R. J., & Surkyn, J. (1988). Cultural dynamics and 
economic theories of fertility change. Population and 
Development Review 14(1), 1–45. 

Lucas, R. E. & Donnellan, A. B. (2011). Personality development across 
the life span: Longitudinal analyses with a national sample from 
Germany. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 847–861 

Madden, M. & Lenhart, A. (2006). Americans who are seeking 
romance use the Internet to help them in their search, but there 
is still widespread public concern about safety of online dating. 
Pew/Internet and American Life Project. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2006/OnlineDating.aspx 

Mandel, H. (2013). Up the down staircase: Women’s upward mobility 
and the wage penalty for occupational feminization, 1970- 2007. 
Social Forces, 91, 1183-1207. 

Manning, W. S., Giordano, P. C., & Longmore, M. A. (2006). Hooking 
up: The relationship contexts of “nonrelationship” sex. Journal of 
Adolescent Research, 21, 459–483. doi:10.1177/0743558406291692 

Martinez, G., Daniels, K., & Chandra, A. (2012). Fertility of men and 
women aged 15-44 years in the United States: National Survey 
of Family Growth, 2006-2010. National Health Statistics Reports, 
51(April). Hyattsville, MD: U.S., Department of Health and Human 
Services. 

McClure, M. J., Lydon., J. E., Baccus, J., & Baldwin, M. W. (2010). 
A signal detection analysis of the anxiously attached at speed-
dating: Being unpopular is only the first part of the problem. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 1024–1036. 

Menkin, J. A., Robles, T. F., Wiley, J. F., & Gonzaga, G. C. (2015). Online 
dating across the life span: Users’ relationship goals. Psychology 
and Aging, 30(4), 987-993. 

Mita, T. H., Dermer, M., & Knight, J. (1977). Reversed facial images 


and the mere-exposure hypothesis. Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology, 35(8), 597–601. 

National Center for Transgender Equality. (2015). National 
transgender discrimination survey. Retrieved from 
http://www.transequality.org/issues/national-transgender-
discrimination-survey 

National Conference of State Legislatures. (2017, June). Cyberbullies 
go catfishing. State Legislatures, 8. 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2015). College 
Drinking. Retrieved from http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/
publications/CollegeFactSheet/CollegeFact.htm 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2016). Alcohol 
facts and statistics. Retrieved from http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/
publications/AlcoholFacts&Stats/AlcoholFacts&Stats.htm 

National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2015). College-age and young 
adults. Retrieved from https://www.drugabuse.gov/related- 
topics/college-age-young-adults/college-addiction-studies-
programs 

National Institute of Drug Abuse. (2018). College-age and young 
adults. Retrieved from https://www.drugabuse.gov/related- 
topics/college-age-young-adults 

NCHEMS. (2016a). Percent of adults 18 to 24 with a high school 
diploma. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/?level=nation&mode=graph&state=0&submeasure=344 

NCHEMS. (2016b). Percent of adults 18 to 24 who are attending 
college. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems. Retrieved from: http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/
index.php?submeasure=331&year=2009&level=nation&mode=graph&state=0 

NCHEMS. (2016c). Percent of adults 25 to 49 who are attending 
college. National Center for Higher Education Management 


Systems. Retrieved from: http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/
index.php?submeasure=332&year=2009&level=nation&mode=graph&state=0 

NCHEMS. (2016d). Percent who earn a Bachelor’s degree within 6 
years. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems. Retrieved from http://www.higheredinfo.org/
dbrowser/?level=nation&mode=graph&state=0&submeasure=27 

Nelson, L. J., Badger, S., & Wu, B. (2004). The influence of culture 
in emerging adulthood: Perspectives of Chinese college students. 
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 28, 26–36. 

Noland, M., Moran, T., & Kotschwar, B. (2016). Is gender diversity 
profitable? Evidence from a global survey. Washington, DC: 
Peterson Institute for International Economics. Retrieved from 
https://www.piie.com/publications/working-papers/gender- 
diversity-profitable-evidence-global-survey. 

OECD. (2014). Education at a Glance 2014: United States, OECD 
Publishing. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/unitedstates/
United%20States-EAG2014-Country-Note.pdf 

OECD. (2015). Education at a Glance 2015: OECD Indicators, OECD 
Publishing. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/
eag-2015-en 

Office of Adolescent Health. (2019). Prevalence of adolescent opioid 
misuse. Retrieved from https://www.hhs.gov/ash/oah/
adolescent-development/substance-use/drugs/opioids/
index.html#prevalence 

Oliver, M. B., & Hyde, J. S. (1993). Gender differences in sexuality: 
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 29–51. doi:10.1037/
0033-2909.114.1.29 

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2019). 
Youth on in employment, education, or training data. Retrieved 
from https://data.oecd.org/youthinac/youth-not-in-
employment-education-or-training-neet.htm 

Owen, J., & Fincham, F. D. (2011). Young adults’ emotional reactions 


after hooking up encounters. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40,321–330. doi:10.1007/s10508-010-9652-x 

Pascarella, E.T. (2006). How college effects students: Ten directions 
for future research. Journal of College Student Development, 47, 
508-520. 

Patton, W. & McMahon, M. (1999). Career development and systems 
theory: A new relationship. Brooks Cole Publishers. Peterson, A. 
(2019, July 9). Women’s World Cup. Changes could go global. The 
Chicago Tribune, p. 5. 

Pew Research Center. (2019). Same-sex marriage around the world. 
Retrieved from https://www.pewforum.org/fact-sheet/gay- 
marriage-around-the-world/ 

Phinney, J. S. & Baldelomar, O. A. (2011). Identity development in 
multiple cultural contexts. In L. A. Jensen (Ed.), Bridging cultural 
and developmental psychology: New syntheses in theory, research 
and policy (pp. 161-186). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Potard, C., Courtois, R., & Rusch, E. (2008). The influences of peers 
on risky behavior during adolescence. European Journal of 
Contraception and Reproductive Health Care, 13(30, 264-270. 

Prinzie, P., Stams, G. J., Dekovic, M., Reijntjes, A. H., & Belsky, J. 
(2009). The relations between parents’ Big Five personality factors 
and parenting: A meta-review. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 97, 351–362. 

Rankin, L. A. & Kenyon, D. B. (2008). Demarcating role transitions 
as indicators of adulthood in the 21st century. Who are they? 
Journal of Adult Development, 15(2), 87-92. doi: 10.1007/
s10804-007-9035-2 

Reis, H. T., & Aron, A. (2008). Love: What is it, why does it matter, and 
how does it operate? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3(1), 
80–86. 

Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N., Shiner, R., N., Caspi, A., & Goldberg, L. 
R. (2007). The power of personality: The comparative validity of 
personality traits, socioeconomic status, and cognitive ability for 
predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 2(4), 313–345. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00047. 


Roberts, B. W., & Mroczek, D. K. (2008). Personality trait change in 
adulthood. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 31–35. 

Rosenberger, N. (2007). Rethinking emerging adulthood in Japan: 
Perspectives from long-term single women. Child Development 
Perspectives, 1, 92–95. 

Rottinghaus, P. J., Coon, K. L., Gaffey, A. R., & Zytowski, D. G. (2007). 
Thirty-year stability and predictive validity of vocational interests. 
Journal of Career Assessment, 15 (1), 5-23. 

Rudman, L. A. (1998). Self-promotion as a risk factor for women: 
The costs and benefits of counterstereotypical impression 
management. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(3), 
629-645. 

Ryan, C. L. & Bauman, K. (March 2016). Educational Attainment in 
the United States: 2015. U.S. Department of Commerce Economics 
and Statistics Administration. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/
publications/2016/demo/p20-578.pdf 

Ryle, R. (2011). Questioning gender. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publishing. 

Schindler, I., Fagundes, C. P., & Murdock, K. W. (2010). Predictors 
of romantic relationship formation: Attachment style, prior 
relationships, and dating goals. Personal Relationships, 17, 97-105. 

Schmitt, D. P., Alcalay, L., Allik, J., Ault, L., Austers, I., Bennett, K. L., 
. . . Zupane`ie`, A. (2003). Universal sex differences in the desire 
for sexual variety: Tests from 52 nations, 6 continents, and 13 
islands. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 85–104. 
doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.85.1.85 

Schwartz, G., Kim, R., Kolundzija, A., Rieger, G., & Sanders, A. (2010). 
Biodemographic and physical correlates of sexual orientation in 
men. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 93-109. 

Simpson, J. A., Collins, W. A., Tran, S., & Haydon, K. C. (2007). 
Attachment and the experience and expression of emotions in 
adult romantic relationships: A developmental perspective. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 355–367. 

Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., Oriña, M. M., & Grich, J. (2002). Working 
models of attachment, support giving, and support seeking in a 


stressful situation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 
598-608. 

Sinnott, J. D. (1998). The development of logic in adulthood. NY: 
Plenum Press. 

Smith, A., & Anderson, M. (2016). 5 facts about online dating. Pew 
Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2016/02/29/5-facts-about-online-dating 

Smith, S., Zhang, X., Basile, K., Merrick, M., Wang, J., Kresnow, M., 
& Chen, J. (2018). National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence 
Survey, United States, 2015. Retrieved from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/2015data- 
brief508.pdf 

Society for the Study of Emerging Adulthood (SSEA). (2016). 
Overview. Retrieved from http://ssea.org/about/index.htm 

Sternberg, R. (1988). A triangular theory of love. New York: Basic. 

Super, D. E. (1980). A life-span life-space approach to career 
development. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 13, 282-298. Tamis-
LeMonda, C. S., Way, N., Hughes, D., Yoshikawa, H., Kalman, R. 
K., & Niwa, E. Y. (2008). Parents’ goals for children: The dynamic 
coexistence of individualism and collectivism in cultures and 
individuals. Social Development, 17, 183– 209. doi:10.1111/
j.1467.9507.2007.00419.x 

Tannen, D. (1990). You just don’t understand: Women and men in 
conversation. New York: Morrow. 

Thornton, A. (2005). Reading history sideways: The fallacy and 
enduring impact of the developmental paradigm on family life. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

TICAS. (2015). Student debt and the class of 2014, The Institute for 
College Access & Success. Retrieved from http://ticas.org/sites/
default/files/pub_files/classof2014.pdf 

Tye, M. H. (2006). Social inequality and well-being: Race-related 
stress, self-esteem, and life satisfaction among African American 
gay and bisexual men. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section 
B, 67(4-B), 0419-4217. 


UNdata (2010). Gross enrollment ratio in tertiary education. United 
Nations Statistics Division. Retrieved November 5, 2010, from 
http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?d=GenderStat&f=inID:68 

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2011). Human 
development report. NY: Oxford University Press. 

Untied, A., Orchowski, L., Mastroleo, N., & Gidycz, C. (2012). College 
students’ social reactions to the victim in a hypothetical sexual 
assault scenario: The role of victim and perpetrator alcohol use. 
Violence and Victims, 27(6), 957-972. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). Educational attainment in the United 
States: 2018. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/data/
tables/2018/demo/education-attainment/cps-detailed-
tables.html 

Violence Policy Center. (2018). More than 1,800 women murdered by 
men in one year, new study finds. Retrieved from http://vpc.org/
press/more-than-1800-women-murdered-by-men-in-one-
year-new-study-finds/ 

Volko, N. D. (2004, September 19). Exploring the Whys of Adolescent 
Drug Use. (United States, National Institute on Drug Abuse). 
Retrieved from http://www.drugabuse.gov/NIDA_notes/
NNvol19N3/DirRepVol19N3.html 

Wang, W., & Parker, K. (2014). Record share of Americans have never 
married: As values, economics and gender patterns change. 
Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2014/09/
2014-09-24_Never- Married-Americans.pdf 

Wang, W., & Taylor, P. (2011). For Millennials, parenthood trumps 
marriage. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 

Welsh, D. P., Grello, C. M., & Harper, M. S. (2006). No strings 
attached: The nature of casual sex in college students. Journal of 
Sex Research, 43, 255–267. doi:10.1080/00224490609552324 

Wighton, K. (2016). World’s obese population hits 640 million, 
according to largest ever study. Imperial College. Retrieved from 
http://www3.imperial.ac.uh/newsandeventspggrp/
imperialcollege/newssummary/news_311-3-2016-22-34-39 


Williams, L., Kabamalan, M., & Ogena, N. (2007). Cohabitation in the 
Philippines: Attitudes and behaviors among young women and 
men. Journal of Marriage and Family, 69(5), 1244–1256. 

Witt, J. (2009). SOC. New York: McGraw Hill. 

World Economic Forum. (2017). Global Gender Gap Report 2017. 
Retrieved from: http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-
report-2017/key-findings/ 

Yu, J., & Xie, Y. (2015). Cohabitation in China: Trends and 
determinants. Population & Development Review, 41 (4), 607-628. 

Zebrowitz, L. A., Bronstad, P. M., & Lee, H. K. (2007). The 
contribution of face familiarity to ingroup favoritism and 
stereotyping. Social Cognition, 25(2), 306–338. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 7 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


PART 
XI 
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE 
ADULTHOOD 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore and connect Psychosocial, Cognitive, 
and Psychosexual Development 
Explore and connect another Theory, Approach, 
or Perspective to work in critical thinking skills for 
client assessments 
Exploring important aspects of a person’s 
experience and ability to justify why they are 
important 



Vignette 

Seth
Photo by Sharon McCutcheon on 
Unsplash 

Seth is a 44 y/o Caucasian 
male. He grew up in a small 
town with six siblings and his 
parents worked hard in a factory 
their whole lives. His parents 
had little education but had high 
hopes for their children and 
always said “if you work hard, 
you can achieve anything” and 
he believed this. Seth started 
working when he was 15 y/o, graduated high school at 18 y/o, and 
then joined the Air Force. He went to college after serving his term but 
had to work during this time to afford school and pay his bills. It took 
6 years, but he was able to earn a degree in Accounting, and he was 
very proud of his accomplishment. 

Seth got married a couple of years after graduating college but 
divorced after 8 years. They did not have any children. He then began 
to experience some health issues which caused him to miss so much 
work that he was eventually laid off. Seth struggled to find work with 
another accounting firm and then suffered a stroke. He had saved 
up some money and had hoped this would help him remain some 
financial stability while looking for another job but lost this sense of 
security after paying for the hospital bills. He then realized he had no 
other choice but to apply for benefits and financial assistance from the 
government. 

Seth decides to seek some support through the VA. He is connected 
with a Social Worker who helps him apply for the needed resources. 
He states “I can’t believe it’s come to this. I never thought I’d have to 
get help like this. It’s just been so hard since I lost my job last year”. The 
Social Worker recognizes Seth has faced some stressors over the past 
few years and explores to see if he feels there may be some benefit in 
seeing a therapist at the VA. Seth states “You know, I’d never thought 


I’d be asking for financial help like this and it’s been tough. I could 
probably use some help to figure out how this has all been affecting 
me”. 


Critical Thinking: 

1. What stage of Erikson’s Theory of Psychosocial 
Development are they currently in? Are they 
meeting the goals of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any struggles with their goals 
in this stage? Examples? 
2. What theory, approach, or perspective from 
previous Dimensions (PIE, Biopsychosocial, 
Sociocultural, or Social Change) would you use to 
assess this client? Why? 
3. What do you feel are the most important 
aspects (physical development, attachment, sexual 
development, etc) to consider for this client? 
Why? 


References 

Hutchinson, E. D. (2019). Dimensions of human behavior (Sixth 
edition). Sage Publications, Inc. 

 



Chapter 25: Physical 
Development in Middle 
Adulthood 

Chapter 25 Learning Objectives 

Explain the difference between primary and 
secondary aging 
Describe sensory changes that occur during middle 
adulthood 
Identify health concerns in middle adulthood 
Explain what occurs during the climacteric for 
females and males 
Describe sexuality during middle adulthood 
Explain the importance of sleep and consequences 
of sleep deprivation 
Describe the importance of exercise and nutrition 
for optimal health 
Describe brain functioning in middle adulthood 


Each person experiences age-related physical changes based on 
many factors: biological factors, such as molecular and cellular 
changes, and oxidative damage are called primary aging, while aging 
that occurs due to controllable factors, such as an unhealthy lifestyle 


including lack of physical exercise and poor diet, is called secondary 
aging (Busse, 1969). These factors are shown in Figure 8.1 

Getting out of shape is not an inevitable part of aging; it is probably 
due to the fact that middle- aged adults become less physically 
active and have experienced greater stress. Smoking tobacco, 
drinking alcohol, poor diet, stress, physical inactivity, and chronic 
disease, such as diabetes or arthritis, reduce overall health. 
However, there are things can be done to combat many of these 
changes by adopting healthier lifestyles. 

Physical Changes 


Hair: When asked to imagine someone in middle adulthood, we 
often picture someone with the beginnings of wrinkles and gray or 
thinning hair. What accounts for these physical changes? 


Hair color is due to a pigment called melanin which is produced 
by hair follicles (Martin, 2014). With aging, the hair follicles produce 
less melanin, and this causes the hair to become gray. Hair color 
typically starts turning lighter at the temples, but eventually all the 
hair will become white. For many, graying begins in the 30s, but it is 
largely determined by your genes. Gray hair occurs earlier in white 
people and later in Asians. 

Genes also determine how much hair remains on your head. 
Almost everyone has some hair loss with aging, and the rate of hair 
growth slows with aging. Many hair follicles stop producing new 
hairs and hair strands become smaller. Men begin showing signs 
of balding by 30 and some are nearly bald by 60. Male-pattern 
baldness is related to testosterone and is identified by a receding 
hairline followed by hair loss at the top of the head. Figure 8.2 shows 
tennis champion Andre Agassi’s characteristic male- patterned 
baldness. Women can also develop female- patterned baldness as 
their hair becomes less dense and the scalp becomes visible (Martin, 
2014). Sudden hair loss, however, can be a symptom of a health 
problem. 


Skin: Skin continues to dry out and is prone to more wrinkling, 
particularly on the sensitive face area. Wrinkles, or creases in the 
skin, are a normal part of aging. As we get older, our skin dries 
and loses the underlying layer of fat, so our face no longer appears 
smooth. Loss of muscle tone and thinning skin can make the face 
appear flabby or drooping. Although wrinkles are a natural part of 
aging and genetics plays a role, frequent sun exposure and smoking 
will cause wrinkles to appear sooner. Dark spots and blotchy skin 
also occur as one ages and are due to exposure to sunlight 
(Moskowitz, 2014). Blood vessels become more apparent as the skin 
continues to dry and get thinner. 

Sarcopenia: The loss of muscle mass and strength that occurs with 
aging is referred to as sarcopenia (Morley, Baumgartner, Roubenoff, 
Mayer, & Nair, 2001). Sarcopenia is thought to be a significant factor 
in the frailty and functional impairment that occurs when older. The 
decline of growth and anabolic hormones, especially testosterone, 
and decreased physical activity have been implicated as causes of 
sarcopenia (Proctor, Balagopal, & Nair, 1998). This decline in muscle 
mass can occur as early as 40 years of age and contributes 
significantly to a decrease in life quality, increase in health care 
costs, and early death in older adults (Karakelides & Nair, 2005). 
Exercise is certainly important to increase strength, aerobic 
capacity, and muscle protein synthesis, but unfortunately it does 
not reverse all the age-related changes that occur. The muscle-to-
fat ratio for both men and women also changes throughout middle 
adulthood, with an accumulation of fat in the stomach area. 

Lungs: The lungs serve two functions: Supply oxygen and remove 
carbon dioxide. Thinning of the bones with age can change the 
shape of the rib cage and result in a loss of lung expansion. Age-
related changes in muscles, such as the weakening of the 
diaphragm, can also reduce lung capacity. Both of these changes 
will lower oxygen levels in the blood and increase the levels of 
carbon dioxide. Experiencing shortness of breath and feeling tired 
can result (NIH, 2014b). In middle adulthood, these changes and 
their effects are often minimal, especially in people who are non-


smokers and physically active. However, in those with chronic 
bronchitis, or who have experienced frequent pneumonia, asthma 
other lung-related disorders, or who are smokers, the effects of 
these normal age changes can be more pronounced. 

Sensory Changes 


Vision: A normal change of the eye due to age is presbyopia, which 
is Latin for “old vision.” It refers to a loss of elasticity in the lens of the 
eye that makes it harder for the eye to focus on objects that are closer 
to the person. When we look at something far away, the lens flattens 
out; when looking at nearby objects tiny muscle fibers around the 
lens enable the eye to bend the lens. With age these muscles weaken 
and can no longer accommodate the lens to focus the light. 
Anyone 
over the age of 35 is at risk for developing presbyopia. According to 
the National Eye Institute (NEI) (2016), signs that someone may have 
presbyopia include: 

Hard time reading small print 
Having to hold reading material farther than arm’s distance 
Problems seeing objects that are close 
Headaches 
Eyestrain 



Another common eye problem people experience as they age are 
floaters, little spots or “cobwebs” that float around the field of vision. 
They are most noticeable if you are looking at the sky on a sunny 
day, or at a lighted blank screen. Floaters occur when the vitreous, 
a gel-like substance in the interior of the eye, slowly shrinks. As it 
shrinks, it becomes somewhat stringy, and these strands can cast 
tiny shadows on the retina. In most cases, floaters are harmless, 
more of an annoyance than a sign of eye problems. However, 
floaters that appear suddenly, or that darken and obscure vision 
can be a sign of more serious eye problems, such a retinal tearing, 
infection, or inflammation. People who are very nearsighted 
(myopic), have diabetes, or who have had cataract surgery are also 
more likely to have floaters (NEI, 2009). 

During midlife, adults may begin to notice a drop in scotopic 


sensitivity, the ability to see in dimmer light. By age 60, the retina 
receives only one third as much light as it did at age 20, making 
working in dimmer light more difficult (Jackson & Owsley, 2000). 
Night vision is also affected as the pupil loses some of its ability 
to open and close to accommodate drastic changes in light. Eyes 
become more sensitive to glare from headlights and street lights 
making it difficult to see people and cars, and movements outside of 
our direct line of sight (NIH, 2016c). 

Finally, some people experience dry eye syndrome, which occurs 
when the eye does not produce tears properly, or when the tears 
evaporate too quickly because they are not the correct consistency(NEI, 2013). While dry eye can affect people at any age, nearly 5 
million Americans over the age of 50 experience dry eye. It affects 
women more than men, especially after menopause. Women who 
experienced an early menopause may be more likely to experience 
dry eye, which can cause surface damage to the eye. 

Hearing: Hearing problems increase during middle adulthood. 
According to a recent UK study (Dawes et al., 2014), the rate of 
hearing problems in their sample doubled between the ages of 40 
and 55 and tripled by age 64. Similar statistics are found in U.S. 
samples of middle-aged adults. Prior to age 40, about 5.5% of adults 
report hearing problems. This jumps to 19% among 40 to 69 year-
olds (American Psychological Association, 2016). Middle-aged adults 
may experience more problems understanding speech when in 
noisy environments, in comparison to younger adults (Füllgrabe, 
Moore, & Stone, 2015; Neidleman, Wambacq, Besing, Spitzer, & 
Koehnke, 2015). As we age we also lose the ability to hear higher 
frequencies (Humes, Kewley-Port, Fogerty, & Kinney, 2010). Hearing 
changes are more common among men than women, but males may 
underestimate their hearing problems (Uchida, Nakashima, Ando, 
Niino, & Shimokata, 2003). For many adults, hearing loss 
accumulates after years of being exposed to intense noise levels. 
Men are more likely to work in noisy occupations. Hearing loss 
is also exacerbated by cigarette smoking, high blood pressure, 


diabetes, and stroke. Most hearing loss could be prevented by 
guarding against being exposed to extremely noisy environments. 

Health Concerns 

Heart Disease: According to the most recent National Vital 
Statistics Reports (Kochanek, Murphy, Xu, & Arias, 2019) heart 
disease continues to be the number one cause of death for 
Americans as it claimed 23% of those who died in 2017. It is also the 
number one cause of death worldwide (World Health Organization, 
2018). Heart disease develops slowly over time and typically appears 
in midlife (Hooker & Pressman, 2016). 

Heart disease can include heart defects and heart rhythm 
problems, as well as narrowed, blocked, or stiffened blood vessels 
referred to as cardiovascular disease. The blocked blood vessels 
prevent the body and heart from receiving adequate blood. 
Atherosclerosis, or a buildup of fatty plaque in the arteries, is the 
most common cause of cardiovascular disease. The plaque buildup 


thickens the artery walls and restricts the blood flow to organs 
and tissues. Cardiovascular disease can lead to a heart attack, chest 
pain (angina), or stroke (Mayo Clinic, 2014a). Figure 8.5 illustrates 
atherosclerosis. 

Symptoms of cardiovascular disease differ for men and women. 
Males are more likely to suffer chest pain, while women are more 
likely to demonstrate shortness of breath, nausea, and extreme 
fatigue. Symptoms can also include pain in the arms, legs, neck, 
jaw, throat, abdomen or back (Mayo Clinic, 2014a). According to the 
Mayo Clinic (2014a) there are many risk factors for developing heart 
disease, including medical conditions, such as high blood pressure, 
high cholesterol, diabetes, and obesity. Other risk factors include: 

Advanced Age-increased risk for narrowed arteries and 
weakened or thickened heart muscle. 
Sex-males are at greater risk, but a female’s risk increases after 
menopause. 



Family History-increased risk, especially if male parent or 
brother developed heart. disease before age 55 or female 
parent or sister developed heart disease before age 65. 
Smoking-nicotine constricts blood vessels and carbon 
monoxide damages the inner lining. 
Poor Diet-a diet high in fat, salt, sugar, and cholesterol. 
Excessive Alcohol Consumption-alcohol can raise the level of 
bad fats in the blood and increase blood pressure 
Stress-unrelieved stress can damage arteries and worsen 
other risk factors. 
Poor Hygiene-establishing good hygiene habits can prevent 
viral or bacterial infections that can affect the heart. Poor 
dental care can also contribute to heart disease. 


Complications of heart disease can include heart failure, when the 
heart cannot pump enough blood to the meet the body’s needs, and 
a heart attack, such as when a blood clot blocks the blood flow to 
the heart. This blockage can damage or destroy a part of the heart 
muscle, and atherosclerosis is a factor in a heart attack. Treatment 
for heart disease includes medication, surgery, and lifestyle changes 
including exercise, healthy diet, and refraining from smoking. 

Sudden cardiac arrest is the unexpected loss of heart functioning, 
breathing, and consciousness, often caused by an arrhythmia or 
abnormal heartbeat. The heartbeat may be too quick, too slow, or 
irregular. With a healthy heart, it is unlikely for a fatal arrhythmia 
to develop without an outside factor, such as an electric shock or 
illegal drugs. If not treated immediately, sudden cardiac arrest can 
be fatal and result in sudden cardiac death. 

Hypertension, or high blood pressure, is a serious health problem 
that occurs when the blood flows with a greater force than normal. 
One in three American adults (70 million people) have hypertension 
and only half have it under control (Nwankwo, Yoon, Burt, & Gu, 
2013). It can strain the heart, increase the risk of heart attack and 
stroke, or damage the kidneys (CDC, 2014a). Uncontrolled high 
blood pressure in early and middle adulthood can also damage the 


brain’s white matter (axons) and may be linked to cognitive 
problems later in life (Maillard et al., 2012). Normal blood pressure 
is under 120/80 (see Table 8.1). 
The first number is the systolic 
pressure, which is the pressure in the blood vessels when the 
heartbeats. The second number is the diastolic pressure, which is 
the pressure in the blood vessels when the heart is at rest. High 
blood pressure is sometimes referred to as the silent killer, as most 
people with hypertension experience no symptoms. Making positive 
lifestyle changes can often reduce blood pressure. 

Blood Pressure Levels Table


Risk factors for high blood pressure include: 

Family history of hypertension 
A diet that is too high in sodium often found in processed 
foods, and too low in potassium 
Sedentary lifestyle and Obesity 
Too much alcohol consumption 
Tobacco use, as nicotine raises blood pressure (CDC, 2014b) 


Cancer: After heart disease, cancer was the second leading cause of 
death for Americans in 2017 as it accounted for 21.3% of all deaths 
(Kochanek et al., 2016). According to the National Institutes of 
Health (2015), cancer is the name given to a collection of related 
diseases in which the body’s cells begin to divide without stopping and 
spread into surrounding tissues. These extra cells can divide, and 
form growths called tumors, which are typically masses of tissue. 
Cancerous tumors are malignant, which means they can invade 


nearby tissues. When removed malignant tumors may grow back. 
Unlike malignant tumors, benign tumors do not invade nearby 
tissues. Benign tumors can sometimes be quite large, and when 
removed usually do not grow back. Although benign tumors in the 
body are not cancerous, benign brain tumors can be life-
threatening. 

Cancer cells can prompt nearby normal cells to form blood vessels 
that supply the tumors with oxygen and nutrients, which allows 
them to grow. These blood vessels also remove waste products from 
the tumors. Cancer cells can also hide from the immune system, a 
network of organs, tissues, and specialized cells that protects the 
body from infections and other conditions. Lastly, cancer cells can 
metastasize, which means they can break from where they first 
formed, called the primary cancer, and travel through the lymph 
system or blood to form new tumors in other parts of the body. 
This new metastatic tumor is the same type as the primary tumor 
(National Institutes of Health, 2015). Figure 8.6 illustrates how 
cancers can metastasize. 


Human Body


Cancer can start almost anywhere in the human body. While normal 
cells mature into very distinct cell types with specific functions, 
cancer cells do not and continue to divide without stopping. 
Further, cancer cells are able to ignore the signals that normally tell 
cells to stop dividing or to begin a process known as programmed 
cell death which the body uses to get rid of unneeded cells. With 
the growth of cancer cells, normal cells are crowded out and the 
body is unable to work the way it is supposed to. For example, the 
cancer cells in lung cancer form tumors which interfere with the 
functioning of the lungs and how oxygen is transported to the rest 
of the body. 

There are more than 100 types of cancer. The American Cancer 


Society assembles a list of the most common types of cancers in 
the United States. To qualify for the 2016 list, the estimated annual 
incidence had to be 40, 000 cases or more. The most common type 
of cancer on the list is breast cancer, with more than 249,000 new 
cases expected in 2016. The next most common cancers are lung 
cancer and prostate cancer. Table 8.2 lists the estimated number 
of new cases and deaths for each common cancer type for 2019 
(American Cancer Society, 2019). 

Table showing types of cancer


Cholesterol is a waxy fatty substance carried by lipoprotein 
molecules in the blood. It is created by the body to create hormones 
and digest fatty foods and is also found in many foods. Your body 
needs cholesterol, but too much can cause heart disease and stroke. 
Two important kinds of cholesterol are low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) and high-density lipoprotein (HDL). The third type of fat is 
called triglycerides. Your total cholesterol score is based on all three 
types of lipids (see Table 8.3). Total cholesterol is calculated by 
adding HDL plus LDL plus 20% of the Triglycerides. 


Cholesterol levels table


LDL cholesterol makes up the majority of the body’s cholesterol, 
however, it is often referred to as “bad” cholesterol because at high 
levels it can form plaque in the arteries leading to heart attack 
and stroke. HDL cholesterol often referred to as “good” cholesterol, 
absorbs cholesterol and carries it back to the liver, where it is then 
flushed from the body. Higher levels of HDL can reduce the risk 
of heart attack and stroke. Triglycerides are a type of fat in the 
blood used for energy. High levels of triglycerides can also increase 
your risk for heart disease and stroke when coupled with high LDL 
and low HDL. All adults 20 or older should have their cholesterol 
checked. In early adulthood, doctors may check every few years if 
the numbers have previously been normal, and there are no other 
signs of heart disease. In middle adulthood, this may become part of 
the annual check-up (CDC, 2015). 

Risk factors for high cholesterol include: A family history for high 
cholesterol, diabetes, a diet high in saturated fats, trans fat, and 
cholesterol, physical inactivity, and obesity. Almost 32% of American 
adults have high LDL cholesterol levels, and the majority do not 
have it under control, nor have they made lifestyle changes (CDC, 
2015). 

Diabetes (Diabetes Mellitus) is a disease in which the body does 
not control the amount of glucose in the blood. This disease occurs 
when the body does not make enough insulin or does not use it 
the way it should (NIH, 2016a). Insulin is a type of hormone that 
helps glucose in the blood enter cells to give them energy. In adults, 


90% to 95% of all diagnosed cases of diabetes are type 2 (American 
Diabetes Association (ADA), 2016). Type 2 diabetes usually begins 
with insulin resistance, a disorder in which the cells in the muscles, 
liver, and fat tissue do not use insulin properly (CDC, 2014d). As 
the need for insulin increases, cells in the pancreas gradually lose 
the ability to produce enough insulin. In some Type 2 diabetics, 
pancreatic beta cells will cease functioning, and the need for insulin 
injections will become necessary. Some people with diabetes 
experience insulin resistance with only minor dysfunction of the 
beta-cell secretion of insulin. Other diabetics experience only slight 
insulin resistance, with the primary cause being a lack of insulin 
secretion (CDC, 2014d). 

One in three adults are estimated to have prediabetes, and 9 in 
10 of them do not know. According to the CDC (2014d) without 
intervention, 15% to 30% of those with prediabetes will develop 
diabetes within 5 years. In 2015, 30.2 million people (9.4% of the 
population) were living with diabetes in America, mostly adults age 
18 and up (CDC, 2017). Table 8.4 shows the numbers in millions 
and percentage of adults, by age and gender, with both diagnosed 
and undiagnosed diabetes. The median age of diagnosis is 54 (CDC, 
2014d). During middle adulthood, the number of people with 
diabetes dramatically increases; with 4.3 million living with diabetes 
prior to age 45, to over 13 million between the ages of 45 to 64; 


a four-fold increase. Men are slightly more likely to experience 
diabetes than are women. 

Diabetes also affects ethnic and racial groups differently. Non-
Hispanic Whites are less likely to be diagnosed with diabetes than 
are Asian Americans, Hispanics, non-Hispanic Blacks, and American 
Indians/Alaskan Natives. However, these general figures hide the 
variations within these groups. 
For instance, the rate of diabetes 
was less for Central, South, and Cuban Americans than for Mexican 
Americans and Puerto Ricans, and less for Alaskan Natives than 
the American Indians of southern Arizona (CDC, 2017). 
Additionally, 
educational attainment, which is linked to one’s economic level, is 
correlated with diabetes. Percentages includes: Less than a high 
school degree (21.6%), high school degree (9.5%), and more than a 
high school degree (7.2%). 


The risk factors for diabetes include: 

Those over age 45 
Obesity 
Family history of diabetes 
History of gestational diabetes (see Chapter 2) 
Race and ethnicity 
Physical inactivity 
Diet. 


Diabetes has been linked to numerous health complications. Adults 
with diabetes are 1.7 times more likely to have cardiovascular 
disease, 1.8 times more likely to experience a heart attack, and 1.5 
times more likely to experience stroke than adults without diabetes. 
Diabetes can cause blindness and other eye problems. Between 
40%-45% of Americans with diabetes have some degree of diabetic 
retinopathy, which is damage to the small blood vessels in the retina 
that may lead to loss of vision (NEI, 2015). More than 4% showed 
advanced diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes is linked as the primary 
cause of almost half (44%) of new cases of kidney failure each year. 
About 60% of non-traumatic limb amputations occur in people with 
diabetes. 
Diabetes has been linked to hearing loss, tinnitus (ringing 
in the ears), gum disease, and neuropathy (nerve disease) (CDC, 
2014d). 

Typical tests for diabetes include a fasting glucose test and the 
A1C (See Table 8.5). Fasting glucose levels should be under 100mg/dl 
(ADA, 2016). The A1C provides information about the average levels 
of blood glucose over the last 3 months (NIH, 2014a). The A1C should 
be under 5.7, where a 5.0 = 97mg/dl and a 6.0 = 126 mg/dl (ADA, 
2016). 


Metabolic Syndrome is a cluster of several cardiometabolic risk 
factors, including large waist circumference, high blood pressure, and 
elevated triglycerides, LDL, and blood glucose levels, which can lead 
to diabetes and heart disease (Crist et al., 2012). The prevalence of 
metabolic syndrome in the U.S. is approximately 34% and is 
especially high among Hispanics and African Americans (Ford, Li, 
& Zhao, 2010). Prevalence increases with age, peaking in one’s 60s 
(Ford et al., 2010). Metabolic syndrome increases morbidity from 
cardiovascular disease and diabetes (Hu et al., 2004; Malik, 2004). 
Hu and colleagues found that even having one or two of the risk 
factors for metabolic syndrome increased the risk of mortality. Crist 
et al. (2012) found that increasing aerobic activity and reducing 
weight led to a drop in many of the risk factors of metabolic 
syndrome, including a reduction in waist circumference and blood 
pressure, and an increase in HDL cholesterol. 

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory disease that causes 
pain, swelling, stiffness, and loss of function in the joints (NIH, 2016b). 
RA occurs when the immune system attacks the membrane lining 
the joints (see Figure 8.8). RA is the second most common form 
of arthritis after osteoarthritis, which is the normal wear and tear 
on the joints discussed in chapter 9. Unlike osteoarthritis, RA is 
symmetric in its attack of the body, thus, if one shoulder is affected 
so is the other. In addition, those with RA may experience fatigue 
and fever. Below are the common features of RA (NIH, 2016b). 


Features of Rheumatoid Arthritis 

Tender, warm, swollen joints 
Symmetrical pattern of affected joints 
Joint inflammation often affecting the wrist and finger joints 
closest to the hand 
Joint inflammation sometimes affecting other joints, including 
the neck, shoulders, elbows, hips, knees, ankles, and feet 
Fatigue, occasional fevers, a loss of energy 
Pain and stiffness lasting for more than 30 minutes in the 
morning or after a long rest 
Symptoms that last for many years 
Variability of symptoms among people with the disease. 


About 1.5 million people (approximately 0.6%) of Americans 
experience rheumatoid arthritis. It occurs across all races and age 
groups, although the disease often begins in middle adulthood and 
occurs with increased frequency in older people. Like some other 
forms of arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis occurs much more 
frequently in women than in men. About two to three times as many 
women as men have the disease (NIH, 2016b). The lifetime risk for 
RA for women is 3.6% and 1.7% for men (Crowson, et al., 2011). 

Genes play a role in the development of RA. However, individual 
genes by themselves confer only a small risk of developing the 
disease, as some people who have these particular genes never 
develop RA. Scientists think that something must occur to trigger 
the disease process in people whose genetic makeup makes them 
susceptible to rheumatoid arthritis. For instance, some scientists 
also think hormonal factors may be involved. In women who 
experience RA, the symptoms may improve during pregnancy and 
flare after pregnancy. Women who use oral contraceptives may 
increase their likelihood of developing RA. This suggests hormones, 
or possibly deficiencies or changes in certain hormones, may 


increase the risk of developing RA in a genetically susceptible 
person (NIH, 2016b). 

Rheumatoid arthritis can affect virtually every area of a person’s 
life, and it can interfere with the joys and responsibilities of work 
and family life. Fortunately, current treatment strategies allow most 
people with RA to lead active and productive lives. Pain-relieving 
drugs and medications can slow joint damage and establishing a 
balance between rest and exercise can also lessen the symptoms of 
RA (NIH, 2016b). 

Fatty liver disease (hepatic steatosis) refers to the accumulation 
of fat in the liver. The liver normally contains little fat, and anything 
below 5% of liver weight is considered normal. This disease is 
present in 33% of American adults. In the past, the main cause of fat 
accumulation in the liver was due to excessive alcohol consumption, 
often eventually leading to cirrhosis and liver failure. Today, 
increased caloric intake, especially resulting in obesity, and little 
physical activity are the main causes. Mild to moderate levels of 
hepatic steatosis can be reversed through healthy lifestyle changes 
(Nassir, Rector, Hammoud, & Ibdah, 2015). 

Digestive Issues 

Heartburn, also called acid indigestion or pyrosis, is a common 
digestive problem in adults and is the result of stomach acid backing 
up into the esophagus. Prolonged contact with the digestive juices 
injures the lining of the esophagus and causes discomfort. 
Heartburn that occurs more frequently may be due to 
gastroesophageal reflux disease or GERD. Normally the lower 
sphincter muscle in the esophagus keeps the acid in the stomach 
from entering the esophagus. In GERD this muscle relaxes too 
frequently and the stomach acid flows into the esophagus. In the 
U.S., 60 million people experience heartburn at least once a month, 
and 15 million experience it every day. Prolonged problems with 


heartburn can lead to more serious complications, including 
esophageal cancer, one of the most lethal forms of cancer in the U.S. 
Problems with heartburn can be linked to eating fatty or spicy foods, 
caffeine, smoking, and eating before bedtime (American College of 
Gastroenterology, 2016a). 

Gallstones are hard particles, including fatty materials, bilepigments, and calcium deposits, that can develop in the gallbladder. 
Ranging in size from a grain of sand to a golf ball, they typically 


take years to develop, but in some people have developed over the 
course of a few months. About 75% of gallstones do not create any 
symptoms, but those that do may cause sporadic upper abdominal 
pain when stones block bile or pancreatic ducts. If stones become 
lodged in the ducts, it may necessitate surgery or other medical 
intervention as it could become life-threatening if left untreated 
(American College of Gastroenterology, 2016b). 

Gallstones are present in about 20% of women and 10% of men 
over the age of 55 (American College of Gastroenterology, 2016b). 
Risk factors include a family history of gallstones, diets high in 
calories and refined carbohydrates (such as, white bread and rice), 
diabetes, metabolic syndrome, Crohn’s disease, and obesity, which 
increases the cholesterol in the bile and thus increases the risk of 
developing gallstones (NIH, 2013). 

Sleep 


According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (Kasper, 
2015) adults require at least 7 hours of sleep per night to avoid the 
health risks associated with chronic sleep deprivation. Less than 6 
hours and more than 10 hours is also not recommended for those 
in middle adulthood (National Sleep Foundation, 2015). Not 
surprisingly, many Americans do not receive the 7-9 hours of sleep 
recommended. In 2013, only 59% of U.S. adults met that standard, 
while in 1942, 84% did (Jones, 2013). This means 41% of Americans 
receive less than the recommended amount of nightly sleep. 
Additional results included that in 1993, 67% of Americans felt they 
were getting enough sleep, but in 2013 only 56% felt they received 
as much sleep as needed. Additionally, 43% of Americans in 2013 
believed they would feel better with more sleep. 

Sleep problems: According to the Sleep in America poll (National 
Sleep Foundation, 2015), 9% of Americans report being diagnosed 
with a sleep disorder, and of those 71% have sleep apnea and 24% 
suffer from insomnia. Pain is also a contributing factor in the 
difference between the amount of sleep Americans say they need 
and the amount they are getting. An average of 42 minutes of sleep 
debt occur for those with chronic pain, and 14 minutes for those 


who have suffered from acute pain in the past week. Stress and 
overall poor health are also key components of shorter sleep 
durations and worse sleep quality. Those in midlife with lower life 
satisfaction experienced greater delay in the onset of sleep than 
those with higher life satisfaction. Delayed onset of sleep could be 
the result of worry and anxiety during midlife, and improvements 
in those areas should improve sleep. Lastly, menopause can affect 
a woman’s sleep duration and quality (National Sleep Foundation, 
2016). 

Children in the home and sleep: As expected, having children at 
home affects the amount of sleep one receives. According to a 2016 
National Center for Health Statistics analysis (CDC, 2016) having 
children decreases the amount of sleep an individual receives, 
however, having a partner can improve the amount of sleep for both 
males and females. Table 8.6 illustrates the percentage of individuals 
not receiving seven hours of sleep per night based on parental role. 

Negative consequences of insufficient sleep: There are many 


consequences of too little sleep, and they include physical, 
cognitive, and emotional changes. Sleep deprivation suppresses 
immune responses that fight off infection, and can lead to obesity, 
memory impairment, and hypertension (Ferrie et al., 2007; Kushida, 
2005). Insufficient sleep is linked to an increased risk for colon 
cancer, breast cancer, heart disease and type 2 diabetes (Pattison, 
2015). A lack of sleep can increase stress as cortisol (a stress 
hormone) remains elevated which keeps the body in a state of 
alertness and hyperarousal which increases blood pressure. Sleep 
is also associated with longevity. Dew et al. (2003) found that older 
adults who had better sleep patterns also lived longer. During deep 
sleep a growth hormone is released which stimulates protein 
synthesis, breaks down fat that supplies energy, and stimulates cell 
division. Consequently, a decrease in deep sleep contributes to less 
growth hormone being released and subsequent physical decline 
seen in aging (Pattison, 2015). 

Sleep disturbances can also impair glucose functioning in middle 
adulthood. Caucasian, African American, and Chinese non-shift-
working women aged 48–58 years who were not taking insulin-
related medications, participated in the Study of Women’s Health 
across the Nation (SWAN) Sleep Study and were subsequently 
examined approximately 5 years later (Taylor et al., 2016). Body 


mass index (BMI) and insulin resistance were measured at two-time 
points. Results indicated that irregular sleep schedules, including 
highly variable bedtimes and staying up much later than usual, are 
associated in midlife women with insulin resistance, which is an 
important indicator of metabolic health, including diabetes risk. 
Diabetes risk increases in midlife women, and irregular sleep 
schedules may be an important reason because irregular bedtime 
schedules expose the body to varying levels of light, which is the 
most important timing cue for the body’s circadian clock. By 
disrupting circadian timing, bedtime variability may impair glucose 
metabolism and energy homeostasis. 

Exercise, Nutrition, and Weight 

The impact of exercise: Exercise is a powerful way to combat the 
changes we associate with aging. Exercise builds muscle, increases 
metabolism, helps control blood sugar, increases bone density, and 
relieves stress. Unfortunately, fewer than half of midlife adults 
exercise and only about 20 percent exercise frequently and 
strenuously enough to achieve health benefits. Many stop 
exercising soon after they begin an exercise program, particularly 
those who are very overweight. The best exercise programs are 
those that are engaged in regularly, regardless of the activity. A 
well-rounded program that is easy to follow includes walking and 
weight training. Having a safe, enjoyable place to walk can make 
the difference in whether or not someone walks regularly. Weight 
lifting and stretching exercises at home can also be part of an 
effective program. Exercise is particularly helpful in reducing stress 
in midlife. Walking, jogging, cycling, or swimming can release the 
tension caused by stressors. Learning relaxation techniques can 
also have healthful benefits. Exercise can be thought of as 
preventative health care. Promoting exercise for the 78 million 


“baby boomers” may be one of the best ways to reduce health care 
costs and improve quality of life (Shure & Cahan, 1998). 

According to the Office of Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion (2008), the following are exercise guidelines for adults: 

Adults should avoid being inactive. Any activity will result in 
some health benefits. 
For substantial health benefits, adults should engage in at least 
150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity exercise OR at 
least 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity. Aerobic 
activity should occur for at least 10 minutes and preferably 
spread throughout the week. 
For more extensive health benefits, adults can increase their 
aerobic activity to 300 minutes per week of moderate-
intensity OR 150 minutes per week of vigorous-intensity 
aerobic activity. 
Adults should also participate in muscle-strengthening 
activities that are moderate or high intensity and involve all 
major muscle groups on two or more days per week. 


Nutritional concerns: Aging brings about a reduction in the number 
of calories a person requires (see Table 8.7 for estimated caloric 
needs in middle-aged adults). Many Americans respond to weight 
gain by dieting. However, eating less does not typically mean eating 
right and people often suffer vitamin and mineral deficiencies as a 
result. All adults need to be especially cognizant of the amount of 
sodium, sugar, and fat they are ingesting. 


Excess Sodium: According to dietary guidelines, adults should 
consume less than 2,300mg (1 teaspoon) per day of sodium. The 
American Heart Association (2016) reports that the average sodium 
intake among Americans is 3440mg per day. Processed foods are 
the main culprits of excess sodium. High sodium levels in the diet 
is correlated with increased blood pressure, and its reduction does 
show corresponding drops in blood pressure. Adults with high blood 
pressure are strongly encouraged to reduce their sodium intake 
to 1500mg (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services & U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USHHS & USDA), 2015). 

Excess Fat: Dietary guidelines also suggests that adults should 
consume less than 10 percent of calories per day from saturated 
fats. The American Heart Association (2016) says optimally we 
should aim for a dietary pattern that achieves 5% to 6% of calories 
from saturated fat. In a 2000 calorie diet that is about 120 calories 
from saturated fat. In the average American diet about 34.3% of the 
diet comes from fat, with 15.0% from saturated fat (Berglund et al., 
1999). Diets high in fat not only contribute to weight gain, but have 
been linked to heart disease, stroke, and high cholesterol. 

Added Sugar: According to the recent Dietary Guidelines for 


Americans (USHHS & USDA, 2015) eating healthy means adults 
should consume less than 10 percent of calories per day from added 
sugars. Yet, currently, about 15% of the calories in the American 
adult diet come from added sugars, or about 22 teaspoons of sugar 
per day (NIH, 2014c). Excess sugar not only contributes to weight 
gain but diabetes and other health problems. 

Metabolism and Weight Gain: One of the common complaints of 
midlife adults is weight gain, especially the accumulation of fat in 
the abdomen, which is often referred to as the middle-aged spread 
(Lachman, 2004). Men tend to gain fat on their upper abdomen 
and back, while women tend to gain more fat on their waist and 
upper arms. Many adults are surprised at this weight gain because 
their diets have not changed, however, their metabolism has slowed 
during midlife. Metabolism is the process by which the body converts 
food and drink into energy. The calories consumed are combined 
with oxygen to release the energy needed to function (Mayo Clinic, 
2014b). People who have more muscle burn more calories, even at 
rest, and thus have a higher metabolism. 


However, as you get older, the amount of muscle decreases. 
Consequently, fat accounts for more of one’s weight in midlife. and 
fat slows down the number of calories burned. To compensate, 
midlife adults have to increase their level of exercise, eat less, and 
watch their nutrition to maintain their earlier physique. 

Obesity: As discussed in the early adulthood chapter, obesity is 
a significant health concern for adults throughout the world, and 
especially America. Obesity rates continue to increase and the 
current rate for those 40-59 is 42.8%, which is the highest 
percentage per age group (CDC, 2017). Being overweight is 
associated with a myriad of health conditions including diabetes, 
high blood pressure, and heart disease. New research is now linking 
obesity to Alzheimer’s disease. Chang et al. (2016) found that being 
overweight in midlife was associated with earlier onset of 
Alzheimer’s disease. The study looked at 1,394 men and women 
who were part of the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. Their 
average age was around 60, and they were followed for 14 years. 
Results indicated that people with the highest body mass index, or 
BMI, at age 50 were more likely to develop Alzheimer’s disease. In 
fact, each one-point increase in BMI was associated with getting 
Alzheimer’s six to seven months earlier. Those with the highest BMIs 
also had more brain changes typical of Alzheimer’s, even if they 
did not have symptoms of the disease. Scientists speculate that fat 
cells may produce harmful chemicals that promote inflammation 
in blood vessels throughout the body, including in the brain. The 
conclusion of the study was that a healthy BMI at midlife may delay 
the onset of Alzheimer’s disease. 

Concluding Thoughts: Many of the changes that occur in midlife 
can be easily compensated for, such as buying glasses, exercising, 
and watching what one eats. However, the percentage of middle 
adults who have a significant health concern has increased in the 
past 15 years. According to the 2016 United Health Foundation’s 
America’s Health Rankings Senior Report, the next generation of 
seniors will be less healthy than the current seniors (United Health 
Foundation, 2016). The study compared the health of middle-aged 


Americans (50-64 years of age) in 2014 to middle-aged Americans 
in 1999. Results indicated that in the past 15 years the prevalence 
of diabetes has increased by 55% and the prevalence of obesity has 
increased by 25%. At the state level, Massachusetts ranked first for 
healthy seniors, while Louisiana ranked last. Illinois ranked 36th, 
while Wisconsin scored higher at 13th. 

What can we conclude from this information? Lifestyle has a strong 
impact on the health status of midlife adults, and it becomes 
important for midlife adults to take preventative measures to 
enhance physical well-being. Those midlife adults who have a strong 
sense of mastery and control over their lives, who engage in 
challenging physical and mental activity, who engage in weight-
bearing exercise, monitor their nutrition, receive adequate sleep, 
and make use of social resources are most likely to enjoy a plateau 
of good health through these years (Lachman, 2004). 

Climacteric 

 


The climacteric, or the midlife transition when fertility declines, is 
biologically based but impacted by the environment. During midlife, 
men may experience a reduction in their ability to reproduce. 
Women, however, lose their ability to reproduce once they reach 
menopause. 

 


Female Sexual and Reproductive Health: Perimenopause refers 
to a period of transition in which a woman’s ovaries stop releasing 
eggs and the level of estrogen and progesterone production decreases.
Menopause is defined as 12 months without menstruation. The 
average age of menopause is approximately 51, however, many 
women begin experiencing symptoms in their 40s. These symptoms 
occur during perimenopause, which can occur 2 to 8 years before 


menopause (Huang, 2007). A woman may first begin to notice that 
her periods are more or less frequent than before. After a year 
without menstruation, a woman is considered menopausal and no 
longer capable of reproduction. 

Symptoms: The symptoms that occur during perimenopause and 
menopause are typically caused by the decreased production of 
estrogen and progesterone (North American Menopause Society, 
2016). The shifting hormones can contribute to the inability to fall 
asleep. Additionally, the declining levels of estrogen may make a 
woman more susceptible to environmental factors and stressors 
which disrupt sleep. A hot flash is a surge of adrenaline that can 


awaken the brain from sleep. It often produces sweat and a change 
of temperature that can be disruptive to sleep and comfort levels. 
Unfortunately, it may take time for the adrenaline to recede and 
allow sleep to occur again (National Sleep Foundation, 2016). 

The loss of estrogen also affects vaginal lubrication which 
diminishes and becomes waterier and can contribute to pain during 
intercourse. The vaginal wall also becomes thinner, and less elastic. 
Estrogen is also important for bone formation and growth, and 
decreased estrogen can cause osteoporosis resulting in decreased 
bone mass. Depression, irritability, and weight gain are often 
associated with menopause, but they are not menopausal (Avis, 
Stellato & Crawford, 2001; Rossi, 2004). Weight gain can occur due 
to an increase in intra-abdominal fat followed by a loss of lean 
body mass after menopause (Morita et al., 2006). Consequently, 
women may need to change their lifestyle to counter any weight 
gain. Depression and mood swings are more common during 
menopause in women who have prior histories of these conditions 
rather than those who have not. 

Additionally, the incidence of depression and mood swings is not 
greater among menopausal women than non-menopausal women. 
Figure 8.12 identifies symptoms experienced by women during 
menopause, however, women vary greatly in the extent to which 
these symptoms are experienced. Most American women go 
through menopause with few problems (Carroll, 2016). Overall, 
menopause is not seen as universally distressing (Lachman, 2004). 

Hormone Replacement Therapy: Concerns about the effects of 
hormone replacement has changed the frequency with which 
estrogen replacement and hormone replacement therapies have 
been prescribed for menopausal women. Estrogen replacement 
therapy was once commonly used to treat menopausal symptoms. 
However, more recently, hormone replacement therapy has been 
associated with breast cancer, stroke, and the development of blood 
clots (NIH, 

2007). Most women do not have symptoms severe enough to 
warrant estrogen or hormone replacement therapy. If so, they can 


be treated with lower doses of estrogen and monitored with more 
frequent breast and pelvic exams. There are also some other ways 
to reduce symptoms. These include avoiding caffeine and alcohol, 
eating soy, remaining sexually active, practicing relaxation 
techniques, and using water-based lubricants during intercourse. 

Menopause and Ethnicity: In a review of studies that mentioned 
menopause, symptoms varied greatly across countries, geographic 
regions, and even across ethnic groups within the same region 
(Palacios, Henderson, & Siseles, 2010). For example, the Study of 
Women’s Health across the Nation (SWAN) examined 14,906 white, 
African American, Hispanic, Japanese American, and Chinese 
American women’s menopausal experiences (Avis et al., 2001). After 
controlling for age, educational level, general health status, and 
economic stressors, white women were more likely to disclose 
symptoms of depression, irritability, forgetfulness, and headaches 
compared to women in the other racial/ethnic groups. African 
American women experienced more night sweats, but this varied 
across research sites. Finally, Chinese American and Japanese 
American reported fewer menopausal symptoms when compared to 
the women in the other groups. Overall, the Chinese and Japanese 
groups reported the fewest symptoms, while white women reported 
more mental health symptoms and African American women 
reported more physical symptoms. 

Cultural Differences: Cultural influences seem to also play a role 
in the way menopause is experienced. Further, the prevalence of 
language specific to menopause is an important indicator of the 
occurrence of menopausal symptoms in a culture. Hmong tribal 
women living in Australia and Mayan women report that there is 
no word for “hot flashes” and both groups did not experience these 
symptoms (Yick-Flanagan, 2013). When asked about physical 
changes during menopause, the Hmong women reported lighter or 
no periods. They also reported no emotional symptoms and found 
the concept of emotional difficulties caused by menopause amusing 
(Thurston & Vissandjee, 2005). Similarly, a study with First Nation 


women in Canada found there was no single word for “menopause” 
in the Oji-Cree or Ojibway languages, with women referring to 
menopause only as “that time when periods stop” (Madden, St 
Pierre-Hansen & Kelly, 2010). 

While some women focus on menopause as a loss of youth, 
womanhood, and physical attractiveness, career-oriented women 
tend to think of menopause as a liberating experience. Japanese 
women perceive menopause as a transition from motherhood to 
a more whole person, and they no longer feel obligated to fulfill 
certain expected social roles, such as the duty to be a mother 
(Kagawa-Singer, Wu, & Kawanishi, 2002). In India, 94% of women 
said they welcomed menopause. Aging women gain status and 
prestige and no longer have to go through self- imposed menstrual 
restrictions, which may contribute to Indian women’s experiences 
(Kaur, Walia, & Singh, 2004). Overall, menopause signifies many 
different things to women around the world and there is no typical 


experience. Further, normalizing rather than pathologizing 
menopause is supported by research and women’s experiences. 

Male Sexual and Reproductive Health: Although males can 
continue to father children throughout middle adulthood, erectile 
dysfunction (ED) becomes more common. Erectile dysfunction 
refers to the inability to achieve an erection or an inconsistent 
ability to achieve an erection (Swierzewski, 2015). Intermittent ED 
affects as many as 50% of men between the ages of 40 and 70. 
About 30 million men in the United States experience chronic ED 
and the percentages increase with age. Approximately 4% of men 
in their 40s, 17% of men in their 60s, and 47% of men older than 75 
experience chronic ED. 

Causes for ED are primarily due to medical conditions, including 
diabetes, kidney disease, alcoholism, and atherosclerosis (build-up 
of plaque in the arteries). Plaque is made up of fat, cholesterol, 
calcium and other substances found in the blood. Over time plaque 
builds up, hardens, and restricts the blood flow in the arteries (NIH, 
2014d). This build-up limits the flow of oxygenated blood to organs 
and the penis. Overall, diseases account for 70% of chronic ED, 
while psychological factors, such as stress, depression, and anxiety 
account for 10%-20% of all cases. Many of these causes are 
treatable, and ED is not an inevitable result of aging. 


Men during middle adulthood may also experience prostate 
enlargement, which can interfere with urination and deficient 
testosterone levels which decline throughout adulthood, but 
especially after age 50. 
If testosterone levels decline significantly, it is 
referred to as andropause or late-onset hypogonadism. Identifying 
whether testosterone levels are low is difficult because individual 
blood levels vary greatly. Low testosterone is not a concern unless 
it accompanied by negative symptoms such as low sex drive, ED, 
fatigue, loss of muscle, loss of body hair, or breast enlargement. 
Low testosterone is also associated with medical conditions, such 
as diabetes, obesity, high blood pressure, and testicular cancer. The 
effectiveness of supplemental testosterone is mixed, and long term 
testosterone replacement therapy for men can increase the risk 
of prostate cancer, blood clots, heart attack, and stroke (WebMD, 
2016). Most men with low testosterone do not have related problems 
(Berkeley Wellness, 2011). 

The Climacteric and Sexuality 

Sexuality is an important part of people’s lives at any age, and many 
older adults are very interested in staying sexually active (Dimah 
& Dimah, 2004). According to the National Survey of Sexual Health 
and Behavior (NSSHB) (Center for Sexual Health Promotion, 2010), 
74% of males and 70% of females aged 40-49 engaged in vaginal 
intercourse during the previous year, while 58% of males and 51% of 
females aged 50-59 did so. 

Despite these percentages indicating that middle adults are sexually 
active, age-related physical changes can affect sexual functioning. 
For women, decreased sexual desire and pain during vaginal 
intercourse because of menopausal changes have been identified 
(Schick et al., 2010). A woman may also notice less vaginal 
lubrication during arousal which can affect overall pleasure (Carroll, 


2016). Men may require more direct stimulation for an erection 
and the erection may be delayed or less firm (Carroll, 2016). As 
previously discussed men may experience erectile dysfunction or 
experience medical conditions (such as diabetes or heart disease) 
that impact sexual functioning. Couples can continue to enjoy 
physical intimacy and may engage in more foreplay, oral sex, and 
other forms of sexual expression rather than focusing as much on 
sexual intercourse. 

The risk of pregnancy continues until a woman has been without 
menstruation for at least 12 months, however, and couples should 
continue to use contraception. People continue to be at risk of 
contracting sexually transmitted infections, such as genital herpes, 
chlamydia, and genital warts. In 2014, 16.7% of the country’s new 
HIV diagnoses (7,391 of 44,071) were among people 50 and older, 
according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(2014e). This was an increase from 15.4% in 2005. Practicing safe sex 
is important at any age, but unfortunately, adults over the age of 
40 have the lowest rates of condom use (Center for Sexual Health 
Promotion, 2010). This low rate of condom use suggests the need to 
enhance education efforts for older individuals regarding STI risks 


and prevention. Hopefully, when partners understand how aging 
affects sexual expression, they will be less likely to misinterpret 
these changes as a lack of sexual interest or displeasure in the 
partner and more able to continue to have satisfying and safe sexual 
relationships. 

Brain Functioning 


The brain at midlife has been shown to not only maintain many 
of the abilities of young adults but also gain new ones. Some 
individuals in middle age actually have improved cognitive 
functioning (Phillips, 2011). The brain continues to demonstrate 
plasticity and rewires itself in middle age based on experiences. 
Research has demonstrated that older adults use more of their 
brains than younger adults. In fact, older adults who perform the 
best on tasks are more likely to demonstrate bilateralization than 
those who perform worst. Additionally, the amount of white matter 
in the brain, which is responsible for forming connections among 
neurons, increases into the 50s before it declines. 

Emotionally, the middle-aged brain is calmer, less neurotic, more 
capable of managing emotions, and better able to negotiate social 
situations (Phillips, 2011). Older adults tend to focus more on 
positive information and less on negative information than those 
younger. In fact, they also remember positive images better than 
those younger. Additionally, the older adult’s amygdala responds 
less to negative stimuli. Lastly, adults in middle adulthood make 
better financial decisions, which seems to peak at age 53, and show 
better economic understanding. Although greater cognitive 
variability occurs among middle adults when compared to those 
both younger and older, those in midlife with cognitive 
improvements tend to be more physically, cognitively, and socially 
active. 


References 

AARP. (2009). The divorce experience: A study of divorce at midlife 
and beyond. Washington, DC: AARP 

Ahlborg, T., Misvaer, N., & Möller, A. (2009). Perception of marital 
quality by parents with small children: A follow-up study when the 
firstborn is 4 years old. Journal of Family Nursing, 15, 237–263. 

Alterovitz, S. S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2013). Relationship goals of 
middle-aged, young-old, and old-old Internet daters: An analysis 
of online personal ads. Journal of Aging Studies, 27, 159–165. 
doi.10.1016/j.jaging.2012.12.006 

American Association of Community Colleges (2016). Plus 50 
community colleges: Ageless learning. Retrieved from 
http://plus50.aacc.nche.edu/Pages/Default.aspx 

American Cancer Society. (2019). Cancer Facts and Figures 2019.
Retrieved from https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer- 
org/research/cancer-facts-and-statistics/annual-cancer-facts-
and-figures/2019/cancer-facts-and-figures-2019.pdf 

American Diabetes Association (2016). Standards of medical care in 
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 39(1), 1-112. 

American Heart Association (2016). Saturated fats. Retrieved from 
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/HealthyLiving/
HealthyEating/Nutrition/Saturated-
Fats_UCM_301110_Article.jsp 

American Psychological Association (2017). Stress in America: The 
state of our nation. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/images/
state-nation_tcm7-225609.pdf 

American Psychological Association (2016). By the numbers: Hearing 
loss and mental health. Monitor on Psychology, 47(4), 9. 

Anderson, E. R., & Greene, S. M. (2011). “My child and I are a package 
deal”: Balancing adult and child concerns in repartnering after 
divorce. Journal of Family Psychology, 25(5), 741-750. 

Anderson, E.R., Greene, S.M., Walker, L., Malerba, C.A., Forgatch, 
M.S., & DeGarmo, D.S. (2004). Ready to take a chance again: 


Transitions into dating among divorced parents. Journal of 
Divorce and Remarriage, 40, 61-75. 

Aquilino, W. (1991). Predicting parents’ experiences with coresidence 
adult children. Journal of Family Issues, 12(3), 323-342. 

Arai, Y., Sugiura, M., Miura, H., Washio, M., & Kudo, K. (2000). Undue 
concern for other’s opinions deters caregivers of impaired elderly 
from using public services in rural Japan. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(10), 961- 968. 

Armour, S. (2007, August 2). Friendships and work: A good or bad 
partnership? USA Today. Retrieved from 
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/workplace/
2007-08-01-work-friends_N.htm 

Avis, N. E., Stellato, R., & Crawford, S. (2001). Is there a menopausal 
syndrome? Menopausal status and symptoms across racial/
ethnic groups. Social Science and Medicine, 52(3), 345-356. 

Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., & Lindenberger, U. (1999). Lifespan 
Psychology: Theory and Application to Intellectual Functioning. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 471-507. 

Bargh, J. A., McKenna, K. Y. A, & Fitsimons, G. G. (2002). Can you 
see the real me? Activation and expression of the true self on the 
Internet. Journal of Social Issues, 58, 33–48. 

Barreto, M., Ryan, M. K., & Schmitt, M. T. (2009). The glass ceiling 
in the 21st century: Understanding the barriers to gender equality. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Baruch, G., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1984). Women in midlife. New York: 
Plenum. 

Beach, S. R., Schulz, R., Yee, J. L., & Jackson, S. (2000). Negative 
and positive health effects of caring for a disabled spouse: 
Longitudinal findings from the caregiver health effects study. 
Psychology and Aging, 15(2), 259-271. 

Beit-Hallahmi, B., & Argyle, M. (1998). Religious behavior, belief, and 
experience. New York: Routledge. 

Bengtson, V. L. (2001). Families, intergenerational relationships, and 
kinkeeping in midlife. In N. M. Putney (Author) & M. E. Lachman 


(Ed.), Handbook of midlife development (pp. 528-579). New York: 
Wiley. 

Berglund, L., Oliver, E. H., Fontanez, N., Holleran, S., Matthews, K., 
Roheim, P. S., & DELTA Investigators. (1999). HDL- subpopulation 
patterns in response to reductions in dietary total and saturated 
fat intakes in healthy subjects. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 70, 992-1000. 

Berkeley Wellness. (2011). The lowdown on low testosterone. 
Retrieved from http://www.berkeleywellness.com/self- care/
sexual-health/article/lowdown-low-testosterone 

Besen, E., Matz-Costa, C., Brown, M., Smyer, M. A., & Pitt-
Catsouphers, M. (2013). Job characteristics, core self-evaluations, 
and job satisfaction. International Journal of Aging & Human 
Development, 76(4), 269-295. 

Billings, A. G., & Moos, R. H. (1981). The role of coping responses and 
social resources in attenuating the stress of life events. Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine, 4, 139–157. 

Birditt, K. S., & Antonucci, T.C. (2012). Till death do us part: Contexts 
and implications of marriage, divorce, and remarriage across 
adulthood. Research in Human Development, 9(2), 103-105. 

Borland, D. C. (1982). A cohort analysis approach to the empty-nest 
syndrome among three ethnic groups of women: A theoretical 
position. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 44, 117–129. 

Borzumato-Gainey, C., Kennedy, A., McCabe, B., & Degges-White, S. 
(2009). Life satisfaction, self-esteem, and subjective age in women 
across the life span. Adultspan Journal, 8(1), 29-42. 

Bouchard, G. (2013). How do parents reaction when their children 
leave home: An integrative review. Journal of Adult Development, 
21, 69-79. 

Bromberger, J. T., Kravitz, H. M., & Chang, Y. (2013). Does risk for 
anxiety increase during the menopausal transition? Study of 
Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN). Menopause, 20(5), 
488-495. 

Brown, L. H., & DeRycke, S. B. (2010). The kinkeeping connection: 


Continuity, crisis and consensus. Journal of Intergenerational 
Relationships, 8(4), 338-353, DOI: 10.1080/15350770.2010.520616 

Brown, S. L., & Lin, I. (2013). The gray divorce revolution: Rising 
divorce among middle aged and older adults 1990-2010. National 
Center for Family & Marriage Research Working Paper Series. 
Bowling Green State University. https://www.bgsu.edu/content/
dam/BGSU/college-of-arts-and- sciences/NCFMR/ 
documents/Lin/The-Gray- Divorce.pdf 

Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). The employment situation-June 
2019. Retrieved from: https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/
empsit.pdf 

Busse, E. W. (1969). Theories of aging. In E. W. Busse & E/. Pfeiffer 
(Eds.), Behavior and adaptation in later life (pp. 11-31). Boston, MA: 
Little Brown. 

Carmichael, C. L., Reis, H. T., & Duberstein, P. R. (2015). In your 20s 
it’s quantity, in your 30s it’s quality: The prognostic value of social 
activity across 30 years of adulthood. Psychology and Aging, 30(1), 
95-105. 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., & Weintraub, J. K. (1989). Assessing 
coping strategies: A theoretically based approach. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 267–283. 

Center for Sexual Health Promotion. (2010). National survey of 
sexual health and behavior. Retrieved from 
http://www.sexualhealth.indiana.edu 

Centers for Disease Control (2014a). About high blood pressure. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/about.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014b). Behaviors that 
increase the risk for high blood pressure. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/behavior.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014c). Measuring high 
blood pressure. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/
bloodpressure/measure.htm 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014d). National 
diabetes statistics report, 2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/national-
diabetes-report-web.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014e). Diagnoses of 
HIV infection among adults aged 50 years and older in the United 
States and dependent areas 2010–2014. HIV surveillance report, 
21(2), 1-69. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/
reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-supplemental-
report-vol-21-2.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Facts about high 
cholesterol. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/cholesterol/
facts.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). The National 
Center for Health Statistics. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/index.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). National diabetes 
statistics report, 2017. Retrieved from: https://www.cdc.gov/
diabetes/pdfs/data/statistics/national-diabetes-statistics-
report.pdf 

Chang, Y. F., An, Y., Bigel, M., Wong, D. F., Troncoso, J. C., O’Brien, 
R. J., Breitner, J. C., Ferruci, L., Resnick, S. M., & Thanbisetty, 
M. (2016). Midlife adiposity predicts earlier onset of Alzheimer’s 
dementia, neuropathology and presymptomatic cerebral amyloid 
accumulation. Molecular Psychiatry, 21(7), 910-915. 

Charness, N., & Krampe, R. T. (2006). Aging and expertise. In K. 
Ericsson, N. Charness & P. Feltovich (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook 
of expertise and expert performance. Cambridge, United Kingdom: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Cherlin, A. J., & Furstenberg, F. F. (1986). The new American 
grandparent: A place in the family, a life apart. New York: Basic 
Books. 

Cohen, S., & Wills, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, and the 
buffering hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 310–357. 

Crawford, S. & Channon, S. (2002). Dissociation between 


performance on abstract tests of executive function and problem 
solving in real life type situations in normal aging. Aging and 
Mental Health, 6, 12-21. 

Crist, L. A., Champagne, C. M., Corsino, L., Lien, L. F., Zhang, G., 
& Young, D. R. (2012). Influence of change in aerobic fitness and 
weight on prevalence of metabolic syndrome. Preventing Chronic 
Disease 9,110171. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd9.110171 

Crowson, C. S., Matteson, E. L., Myasoedova, E., Michet, C. J., Ernste, 
F. C., Warrington, K. J., …Gabriel, S. E. (2011). The lifetime risk 
of adult-onset rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory 
autoimmune rheumatic diseases. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 63(3), 
633-639. doi: 10.1002/art.30155. 

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal 
experience. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. 

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology of 
discovery and invention. New York: Harper 

Collins. Dawes, P., DicMonrokinson, C., Emsley, R., Bishop, P. N., 
Cruickshanks, K. J., Edmundson-Jones, M., …. Munro, K. (2014). 
Vision impairment and dual sensory problems in middle age. 
Ophthalmic Physiological Optics, 34, 479–488. doi: 10.1111/
opo.12138479 

Degges-White, S., & Myers, J, E. (2006). Women at midlife: An 
exploration of chronological age, subjective age, wellness, and life 
satisfaction, Adultspan Journal, 5, 67-80. 

DeLongis, A., Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1988). The impact of daily 
stress on health and mood: Psychological and social resources 
as mediators. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 
486–495. 

Dennerstein, L., Dudley, E., & Guthrie, J. (2002). Empty nest or 
revolving door? A prospective study of women’s quality of life in 
midlife during the phase of children leaving and re-entering the 
home. Psychological Medicine, 32, 545–550. 

DePaulo, B. (2014). A singles studies perspective on mount marriage. 


Psychological Inquiry, 25(1), 64-68. doi: 10.1080/
1047840X.2014.878173 

Desilver, D. (2016). In the U. S. and abroad, more young adults are 
living with their parents. Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/05/24/in-the-
u-s-and-abroad-more-young-adults-are-living-with-their- 
parents/ 

de St. Aubin, E., & Mc Adams, D. P. (1995). The relation of generative 
concern and generative action to personality traits, satisfaction/
happiness with life and ego development. Journal of Adult 
Development, 2, 99-112. 

De Vaus, D. & McAllister, I. (1987). Gender differences in religion: 
A test of the structural location theory. American Sociological 
Review, 52, 472-481. 

Dew, M. A., Hoch, C. C., Buysse, D. J., Monk, T. H., Begley, A. E., 
Houck, P. R.,…Reynolds, C. F., III. (2003). Healthy older adults’ 
sleep predicts all-cause mortality at 4 to 19 years of follow-up. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 65(1), 63–73. 

Dimah, K., & Dimah, A. (2004). Intimate relationships and sexual 
attitudes of older African American men and women. The 
Gerontologist, 44, 612-613. 

Drake, B. (2013). Another gender gap: Men spend more time in leisure 
activities. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/06/10/another-
gender-gap-men-spend-more-time-in-leisure-activities/ 

Dunér, A., & Nordstrom, M. (2007). The roles and functions of the 
informal support networks of older people who receive formal 
support: A Swedish qualitative study. Ageing & Society, 27, 67– 85. 
doi:10.1017/ S0144686X06005344 

Easterlin, R. A. (2006). Life cycle happiness and its sources: 
Intersections of psychology, economics, and demography. Journal 
of Economic Psychology, 27, 463-482. 

Eastley, R., & Wilcock, G. K. (1997). Prevalence and correlates of 
aggressive behaviors occurring in patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 12, 484-487. 


Elsesser, L., & Peplau, L. A. (2006). The glass partition: Obstacles to 
cross-sex friendships at work. Human Relations, 59(8), 1077–1100. 

Emslie, C., Hunt, K., & Lyons, A. (2013. The role of alcohol in forging 
and maintaining friendships amongst Scottish men in midlife. 
Health Psychology, 32(10, 33-41. 

Ericsson, K. A., Feltovich, P. J., & Prietula, M. J. (2006). Studies of 
expertise from psychological perspectives. In K. Ericsson, N. 
Charness & P. Feltovich (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of expertise 
and expert performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Erikson, E. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton & 
Company. Erikson, E. (1959). Identity and the life cycle. New York: 
Norton & Company. Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed.
New York: Norton & Company. 

Fehr, B. (2008). Friendship formation. In S. Sprecher, A. Wenzel, & J. 
Harvey (Eds.), Handbook of Relationship Initiation (pp.29–54). New 
York, NY: Psychology Press. 

Ferrie, J. E., Shipley, M. J., Cappuccio, F. P., Brunner, E., Miller, M. A., 
Kumari, M., & Marmot, M. G. (2007). A prospective study of change 
in sleep duration: Associations with mortality in the Whitehall II 
cohort. Sleep, 30(12), 1659. 

Ford, E. S., Li, C., & Zhao, G. (2010). Prevalence and correlates of 
metabolic syndrome based on a harmonious definition among 
adults in the US. Journal of Diabetes, 2(3), 180-193. 

Friedman, M., & Rosenman, R. (1959). Association of specific overt 
behaviour pattern with blood and cardiovascular findings. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 169, 1286–1296. 

Fry, R. (2017). It’s becoming more common for young adults to live 
at home-and for longer stretches. Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/05/05/its-
becoming-more-common-for-young-adults-to-live-at-home-
and- for-longer-stretches/ft_17-05-03_livingathome_bygen2/ 

Füllgrabe, C., Moore, B. C. J., & Stone, M. A. (2015). Age-group 
differences in speech identification despite matched audio 


metrically normal hearing: contributions from auditory temporal 
processing and cognition. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 6, 
1-25. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2014.00347 

Fung, H. H. (2013). Aging in culture. Gerontologist, 53(3), 369-377. 

Gerstel, N., & Gallagher, S. K. (1993). Kinkeeping and distress: 
Gender, recipients of care, and work–family conflict. Journal of 
Marriage and the Family, 55, 598–607. 

Gibbons, C., Creese, J., Tran, M., Brazil, K., Chambers, L., Weaver, B., 
& Bedard, M. (2014). The psychological and health consequences 
of caring for a spouse with dementia: A critical comparison of 
husbands and wives. Journal of Women & Aging, 26, 3-21. 

Gilleard, C., & Higgs, P. (2000). Cultures of aging: Self, citizen and the 
body. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Publishers. 

Goldscheider, F., & Kaufman, G. (2006). Willingness to stepparent: 
Attitudes about partners who already have children. Journal of 
Family Issues, 27, 1415 – 1436. 

Goldscheider, F., & Sassler, S. (2006). Creating stepfamilies: 
Integrating children into the study of union formation. Journal of 
Marriage and Family, 68, 275 – 291. 

Gorchoff, S. M., John, O. P., & Helson, R. (2008). Contextualizing 
change in marital satisfaction during middle age. Psychological 
Science, 19, 1194–1200. 

Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (2000). The timing of divorce: 
Predicting when a couple will divorce over a 14-year period. 
Journal of Marriage & the Family, 62, 737-745. 

Greene, S. M., Anderson, E. R., Hetherington, E., Forgtch, M. S., 
& DeGarmo, D. S. (2003). Risk and resilience after divorce. In 
F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal family processes: Growing diversity and 
complexity (3rd ed., pp. 96-120). New York: Guilford Press. 

Greenfield, E. A., & Marks, N. F. (2006). Linked lives: Adult children’s 
problems and their parents’ psychological and relational well-
being. Journal of Marriage and Family, 68, 442-454. 

Greenfield, E. A., Vaillant, G. E., & Marks, N. F. (2009). Do formal 
religious participation and spiritual perceptions have 


independent linkages with diverse dimensions of psychological 
well-being? Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 50, 196-212. 

Gripsrud, J. (2007). Television and the European public sphere. 
European Journal of Communication, 22, 479-492. 

Grzywacz, J. G. & Keyes, C. L. (2004). Toward health promotion: 
Physical and social behaviors in complete health. Journal of Health 
Behavior, 28(2), 99-111. 

Ha, J., Hong, J., Seltzer, M. M., & Greenberg, J. S. (2008). Age and 
gender differences in the well-being of midlife and aging parents 
with children with mental health or developmental problems: 
Report of a national study. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 
49, 301-316. 

Harrison, J., Barrow, S., Gask, L., & Creed, F. (1999). Social 
determinants of GHQ score by postal survey. Journal of Public 
Health Medicine, 21, 283–288. doi:10.1093/pubmed/21.3.283 

Hawkley, L. C., Hughes, M. E., Waite, L. J., Masi, C. M., Thisted, 
R. A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2008). From social structural factors to 
perceptions of relationship quality and loneliness: The Chicago 
health, aging, and marital status transitions and health outcomes 
social relations study. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B: 
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 63, 375–384. 
doi:10.1093/geronb/ 63.6.S375 

Hayslip Jr., B., Henderson, C. E., & Shore, R. J. (2003). The Structure 
of Grandparental Role Meaning. Journal of Adult Development, 
10(1), 1-13. 

Hedlund, J., Antonakis, J., & Sternberg, R. J. (2002). Tacit knowledge 
and practical intelligence: Understanding the lessons of experience. 
Retrieved from http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/army/
ari_tacit_knowledge.pdf 

Herman-Stabl, M. A., Stemmler, M., & Petersen, A. C. (1995). 
Approach and avoidant coping: Implications for adolescent 
mental health. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 24, 649–665. 

Hetherington, E. M. & Kelly, J. (2002). For better or worse: Divorce 
reconsidered. New York, NY: Norton. 

Holland, K. (2014). Why America’s campuses are going gray. CNBC. 


Retrieved from http://www.cnbc.com/2014/08/28/why- 
americas-campuses-are-going-gray.html 

Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B., & Layton, J. B. (2010). Social 
relationships and mortality risk: a meta-analytic review. PLoS 
Medicine, 7(7), e1000316. 

Hooker, E., & Pressman, S. (2016). The healthy life. NOBA. Retrieved 
from http://nobaproject.com/modules/the-healthy-life 

Horn, J. L., Donaldson, G., & Engstrom, R. (1981). Apprehension, 
memory, and fluid intelligence decline in adulthood. Research on 
Aging, 3(1), 33-84. 

House, J. S., Landis, K. R., & Umberson, D. (1988). Social relationships 
and health. Science, 241, 540–545 

Hu, G., Qiao, Q., Tuomilehto, J., Balkau, B., Borch, Johnsen, K., & 
Pyorala, K. (2004). Prevalence of metabolic syndrome and its 
relation to all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in non-diabetic 
European men and women. Archives of Internal Medicine, 164(10),
1066-1076. 

Huang, J. (2007). Hormones and female sexuality. In M. Tepper & 
A. F. Owens (Eds.), Sexual Health, Vol 2: Physical Foundations (pp. 
43-78). Westport, CT: Praeger. 

Humes, L. E., Kewley-Port, D., Fogerty, D., & Kinney, D. (2010). 
Measures of hearing threshold and temporal processing across 
the adult lifespan. Hearing Research, 264(1/2), 30-40. doi:10.1016/
j.heares.2009.09.010 

International Labour Organization. (2011). Global Employment 
Trends: 2011. Retrieved from http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/
groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/@publ/documents/
publication/wcms_150440.pdf 

Iribarren, C., Sidney, S., Bild, D. E., Liu, K., Markovitz, J. H., Roseman, 
J. M., & Matthews, K. (2000). Association of hostility with coronary 
artery calcification in young adults. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 283, 2546–2551. 

Jackson, G. R. & Owsley, C. (2000). Scotopic sensitivity during 
adulthood. Vision Research, 40 (18), 2467-2473. doi:10.1016/
S0042-6989(00)00108-5 


Jones, J. M. (2013). In U.S., 40% Get Less than Recommended Amount 
of Sleep. Gallup. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/
166553/less-recommended- amount 
sleep.aspx?g_source=sleep%202013&g_medium=search&g_campaign=tiles 

Kagawa-Singer, M., Wu, K., & Kawanishi, Y. (2002). Comparison of 
the menopause and midlife transition between Japanese 
American and European American women. Medical Anthropology 
Quarterly, 16(1), 64-91. 

Kang, S. W., & Marks, N. F. (2014). Parental caregiving for a child 
with special needs, marital strain, and physical health: Evidence 
from National Survey of Midlife in the U.S. 2005. Contemporary 
Perspectives in Family Research, 8A, 183- 209. 

Karakelides, H., & Nair, K. S. (2005). Sarcopenia of aging and its 
metabolic impact. Current Topics in Developmental Biology, 68, 
123-148. 

Kasper, T. (2015). Why you only need 7 hours of sleep. American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine. Retrieved from 
http://sleepeducation.org/news/2015/06/03/why-you-only-
need-7-hours-of-sleep 

Kaufman, B. E., & Hotchkiss, J. L. 2003. The economics of labor 
markets (6th ed.). Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western. 

Kaufman, S. B., & Gregoire, C. (2016). How to cultivate creativity.
Scientific American Mind, 27(1), 62-67. 

Kaur, S., Walia, I., & Singh, A. (2004). How menopause affects the 
lives of women in suburban Chandigarh, India. Climacteric, 7(2), 
175-180. 

Knowles, M. S., Holton, E. F., & Swanson, R. A. (1998). The adult 
learner: A neglected species. Houston: Gulf Pub., Book Division. 

Kochanek, K. D., Murphy, S. L., Xu, J., & Arias, E. (2019). Deaths: Final 
data for 2017. National Vital Statistics Reports, 68(9), 1-77. 

Kouzis, A. C., & Eaton, W. W. (1998). Absence of social networks, 
social support, and health services utilization. Psychological 
Medicine, 28, 1301–1310. doi:10.1017/S0033291798007454 


Krause, N. A., Herzog, R., & Baker, E. (1992). Providing support to 
others and well-being in later life. Journal of Gerontology: 
Psychological Sciences, 47, P300-311. 

Kühnel, J., & Sonnentag, S. (2011). How long do you benefit from 
vacation? A closer look at the fade-out vacation effects. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 32, 125-143. 

Kushida, C. (2005). Sleep deprivation: basic science, physiology, and 
behavior. London, England: Informal Healthcare. 

Lachman, M. E. (2004). Development in midlife. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 55(1), 305-331. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.psych.55.090902.141521 

Landsford, J. E., Antonucci, T.C., Akiyama, H., & Takahashi, K. (2005). 
A quantitative and qualitative approach to social relationships and 
well-being in the United States and Japan. Journal of Comparative 
Family Studies, 36, 1-22. 

Leach, M. S., & Braithwaite, D. O. (1996). A binding tie: Supportive 
communication of family kinkeepers. Journal of Applied 
Communication Research, 24, 200–216. 

Lee, B., Lawson, K. M., Chang, P., Neuendorf, C., Dmitrieva, N. O., 
& Ameida, D. H. (2015). Leisure-time physical activity moderates 
the longitudinal associations between work-family spillover and 
physical health. Journal of Leisure Research, 47(4), 444-466. 

Levinson, D. J. (1978). The seasons of a man’s life. New York: Knopf. 

Livingston, G. (2014). Four in ten couples are saying I do again. In 
Chapter 3. The differing demographic profiles of first-time marries, 
remarried and divorced adults. Pew Research Center. Retrieved 
from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/11/14/
chapter-3-the-differing-demographic-profiles-of-first-time-
married- remarried-and-divorced-adults/ 

Madden, S., St Pierre-Hansen, N., & Kelly L. (2010). First Nations 
women’s knowledge of menopause: Experiences and perspectives. 
Canadian Family Physician, 56(9), e331-e337. 

Malik, S. (2004). Impact of the metabolic syndrome on mortality 
from coronary heart disease, cardiovascular disease, and all 
causes in United States adults. Circulation, 110(10), 1245-1250. 


Malone, J. C., Liu, S. R., Vaillant, G. E., Rentz, D. M., & Waldinger, R. J. 
(2016). Midlife Eriksonian psychosocial development: Setting the 
stage for late-life cognitive and emotional health. Developmental 
Psychology, 52(3), 496-508. 

Marketing Charts Staff. (2014). Are young people watching less TV?
Retrieved from http://www.marketingcharts.com/television/
are-young-people-watching-less-tv-24817/ 

Martin, L. J. (2014). Aging changes in hair and nails. U.S. National 
Library of Medicine. Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/ency/article/004005.htm 

Matthews, K. A., Glass, D. C., Rosenman, R. H., & Bortner, R. W. 
(1977). Competitive drive, pattern A, and coronary heart disease: 
A further analysis of some data from the Western Collaborative 
Group Study. Journal of Chronic Diseases, 30, 489–498. 

Mayo Clinic. (2014a). Heart disease. Retrieved from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/heart- 
disease/basics/definition/con-20034056 

Mayo Clinic. (2014b). Metabolism and weight loss: How you burn 
calories. Retrieved from http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy- 
lifestyle/weight-loss/in-depth/metabolism/art-20046508 

McKenna, K. A. (2008) MySpace or your place: Relationship initiation 
and development in the wired and wireless world. In S. Sprecher, 
A. Wenzel, & J. Harvey (Eds.), Handbook of relationship initiation(pp. 235–247). New York, NY: Psychology Press. 

McKenna, K. A., Green, A. S., & Gleason, M. E. J. (2002). Relationship 
formation on the Internet: What’s the big attraction? Journal of 
Social Issues, 58, 9–31. 

Metlife. (2011). Metlife study of caregiving costs to working caregivers: 
Double jeopardy for baby boomers caring for their parents.
Retrieved from http://www.caregiving.org/wp-content/
uploads/2011/06/mmi-caregiving-costs-working- 
caregivers.pdf 

Maillard, P., Sashardi, S., Beiser, A., Himail, J. J., Au, R., Fletcher, E., 
…. DeCarli, C. (2012). Effects of systolic blood pressure on white-


matter integrity in young adults in the Farmington Heart Study: A 
cross-sectional study. The Lancet: Neurology, 11(12), 1039-1047. 

Miller, T. Q., Smith, T. W., Turner, C. W., Guijarro, M. L., & Hallet, A. J. 
(1996). Meta-analytic review of research on hostility and physical 
health. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 322–348. 

Mitchell, B. A., & Lovegreen, L. D. (2009). The empty nest syndrome 
in midlife families: A multimethod exploration of parental gender 
differences and cultural dynamics. Journal of Family Issues, 30,1651–1670. 

Montenegro, X. P. (2003). Lifestyles, dating, and romance: A study of 
midlife singles. Washington, DC: AARP. 

Monthly Labor Review. (2013). Percentage of the non-
institutionalized civilian workforce employed by gender & age.
Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/cps_aa2013.htm 

Moravec, C. S. (2008). Biofeedback therapy in cardiovascular 
disease: rationale and research overview. Cleveland Clinic Journal 
of Medicine, 75, S35–S38. 

Morita, Y., Iwamoto, I., Mizuma, W., Kuwahata, T., Matsuo, T., 
Yoshinaga, M., &Douchi, T. (2006). Precedence of the shift of 
body-fat distribution over the change in body composition after 
menopause. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 32, 513-516. 

Morley, J. E., Baumgartner, R. N., Roubenoff, R., Mayer, J., & Nair, K. 
S. (2001). Sarcopenia. Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine, 
137(4), 231-243. 

Moskowitz, R. J. (2014). Wrinkles. U. S. National Library of Medicine. 
Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/
article/003252.htm 

Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). The concept of flow. In 
C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology(pp. 89-105). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Nassir, F., Rector, S., Hammoud, G.M., & Ibdah, J.A. (2015). 
Pathogenesis and prevention of hepatic steatosis. 
Gastroenterology & Hepatology, 11(3), 167-175. 

National Alliance for Caregiving. (2015). Caregiving in the U.S. 2015. 
Retrieved from http://www.caregiving.org/caregiving2015. 


National Eye Institute. (2009). Facts about floaters. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/floaters/floaters 

National Eye Institute. (2013). Facts about dry eye. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/dryeye/dryeye 

National Eye Institute. (2015). Facts about diabetic eye disease. 
Retrieved from: https://nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic/retinopathy 

National Eye Institute. (2016). Facts about presbyopia. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/errors/presbyopia 

National Institutes of Health. (2007). Menopause: MedlinePlus 
Medical Encyclopedia. Retrieved from http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/ency/article/000894.htm 

National Institutes of Health. (2013). Gallstones. U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services. Retrieved from 
http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/
digestive-diseases/gallstones/Pages/facts.aspx 

National Institutes of Health. (2014a). The A1C and diabetes. Retrieved 
from http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health- information/health-
topics/diagnostic-tests/a1c-test-diabetes/Pages/index.aspx 

National Institutes of Health (2014b). Age changes in the lungs.
Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/
article/004011.htm 

National Institutes of Health (2014c). Sweet stuff: How sugars and 
sweeteners affect your health. Retrieved from 
https://newsinhealth.nih.gov/issue/oct2014/feature1 

National Institutes of Health. (2014d). What is atherosclerosis? 
Retrieved from http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health- topics/
topics/atherosclerosis 

National Institutes of Health. (2015). Cancer. Retrieved from 
https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/understanding/what-
is-cancer 

National Institutes of Health. (2016a). Facts about diabetes. Retrieved 


from http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health- 
topics/Diabetes/diabetes-facts/Pages/default.aspx 

National Institutes of Health (2016b). Handout on Health: Rheumatoid 
Arthritis. Retrieved from http://www.niams.nih.gov/
health%5Finfo/rheumatic%5Fdisease/ 

National Institutes of Health. (2016c). Older drivers: How health 
affects driving. Retrieved from http://nihseniorhealth.gov/
olderdrivers/howhealthaffectsdriving/01.html 

National Sleep Foundation. (2015). 2015 Sleep in America™ poll finds 
pain a significant challenge when it comes to Americans’ sleep. 
National Sleep Foundation. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/media-center/press-release/
2015-sleep- america-poll 

National Sleep Foundation. (2016). Menopause and Insomnia. 
National Sleep Foundation. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/ask-the-expert/menopause-and-
insomnia 

Neidleman, M. T., Wambacq, I., Besing, J., Spitzer, J. B., & Koehnke, 
J. (2015). The Effect of Background Babble on Working Memory in 
Young and Middle-Aged Adults. Journal of the American Academy 
of Audiology, 26(3), 220-228. doi:10.3766/jaaa.26.3.3 

Neugarten, B. L. (1968). The awareness of middle aging. In B. L. 
Neugarten (Ed.), Middle age and aging (pp. 93-98). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Neugarten, B. L., & Weinstein, K. K. (1964). The changing American 
grandparent. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 26, 199–204. 

Newton, T., Buckley, A., Zurlage, M., Mitchell, C., Shaw, A., & 
Woodruff-Borden, J. (2008). Lack of a close confidant: Prevalence 
and correlates in a medically underserved primary care sample. 
Psychology, Health & Medicine, 13, 185– 192. doi:10.1080/ 
13548500701405491 

Nimrod, G., Kleiber, D. A., & Berdychevesky, L. (2012). Leisure in 
coping with depression. Journal of Leisure Research, 44(4), 414-449. 

Norman, G. (2005). Research in clinical reasoning: Past history and 


current trends. Medical Education, 39, 418–427. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-2929.2005.02127.x 

North American Menopause Society. (2016). Menopause FAQs: 
Understanding the symptoms. Retrieved from 
Http://www.menopause.org/for-women/expert-answers-to-
frequently-asked-questions-about-menopause/menopause- 
faqs-understanding-the-symptoms 

Nwankwo T., Yoon S. S., Burt, V., & Gu, Q. (2013) Hypertension among 
adults in the US: National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey, 2011-2012. NCHS Data Brief, No. 133. Hyattsville, MD: 
National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, US Dept of Health and Human Services. 

Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2008). The 
physical activity guidelines for Americans. Retrieved from 
http://health.gov/
paguidelines/?_ga=1.177233189.1671103883.1467228401 

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). 
Average annual hours actually worked per worker. OECD Stat. 
Retrieved from http://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?DataSetCode=ANHRS 

Palacios, S., Henderson V. W., & Siseles, N. (2010). Age of menopause 
and impact of climacteric symptoms by geographical region. 
Climacteric, 13(5), 419-428. 

Parker, K. & Patten, E. (2013). The sandwich generation: Rising 
financial burdens for middle-aged Americans. Pew Research 
Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/
01/30/the-sandwich-generation/ 

Patel, C., Marmot, M. G., & Terry, D. J. (1981). Controlled trial of 
biofeedback-aided behavioural methods in reducing mild 
hypertension. British Medical Journal (Clinical research ed.), 282, 
2005–2008. 

Pattison, K. (2015). Sleep deficit. Experience Life. Retrieved from 
https://experiencelife.com/article/sleep-deficit/ 

Payne, K. K. (2015). The remarriage rate: Geographic variation, 2013. 
National Center for Family & Marriage Research. Retrieved from 


http://bgsu.edu/ncfmr/resources/data/family-profiles/payne-
remarriage-rate-fp-15-08.html 

Peterson, B. E. & Duncan, L. E. (2007). Midlife women’s generativity 
and authoritarianism: Marriage, motherhood, and 10 years of 
aging. Psychology and Aging, 22(3), 411-419. 

Peterson, B. E., Smirles, K. A., & Wentworth, P. A. (1997). Generativity 
and authoritarianism: Implications for personality, political 
involvement, and parenting. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 72, 1202-1216. 

Pew Research Center. (2010). The return of the multi-generational 
family household. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/03/18/the-return-of-
the-multi-generational-family-household/ 

Pew Research Center. (2010a). How the great recession has changed 
life in America. Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/
2010/06/30/how-the-great-recession-has-changed-life-in-
america/ 

Pew Research Center. (2010b). Section 5: Generations and the great 
recession. Retrieved from http://www.people- press.org/2011/
11/03/section-5-generations-and-the-great-recession/ 

Pew Research Center. (2015). Caring for aging parents. Family 
support in graying societies. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/05/21/4-caring-for-
aging-parents/ 

Pew Research Center. (2016). The Gender gap in religion around the 
world. Retrieved from http://www.pewforum.org/2016/03/22/
the-gender-gap-in-religion-around-the-world/ 

Phillips, M. L. (2011). The mind at midlife. American Psychological 
Association. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/monitor/2011/
04/mind-midlife.aspx 

Proctor, D. N., Balagopal, P., & Nair, K. S. (1998). Age-related 
sarcopenia in humans is associated with reduced synthetic rates 
of specific muscle proteins. Journal of Nutrition, 128(2 Suppl.), 
351S-355S. 


Project Time-Off (2016). The state of American vacation: How 
vacation became a casualty of our work culture. Retrieved from 
http://www.projecttimeoff.com/research/state-american-
vacation-2016 

Qian, X., Yarnal, C. M., Almeida, D. M. (2013). Does leisure time as a 
stress coping source increase affective complexity? Applying the 
Dynamic Model of Affect (DMA). Journal of Leisure Research, 45(3), 
393-414. 

Ray, R., Sanes, M., & Schmitt, J. (2013). No-vacation nation revisited. 
Center for Economic Policy Research. Retrieved from 
http://cepr.net/publications/reports/no-vacation-nation-2013 

Ray, R., & Schmitt, J. (2007). No vacation nation USA – A comparison 
of leave and holiday in OECD countries. Retrieved from 
http://www.law.harvard.edu/programs/lwp/papers/
No_Holidays.pdf 

Research Network on Successful Midlife Development. (2007, 
February 7). Midlife Research – MIDMAC WebSite. Retrieved from 
http://midmac.med.harvard.edu/research.html 

Riordan, C. M., & Griffeth, R. W. (1995). The opportunity for 
friendship in the workplace: An underexplored construct. Journal 
of Business and Psychology, 10, 141–154. 

Rossi, A. S. (2004). The menopausal transition and aging process. 
In How healthy are we: A national study of health in midlife. (pp. 
550-575). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Rubin, M., Scevak, J., Southgate, E., Macqueen, S., Williams, P., & 
Douglas, H. (2018). Older women, deeper learning, and greater 
satisfaction at university: Age and gender predict university 
students’ learning approach and degree satisfaction. Diversity in 
Higher Education, 11(1), 82-96. 

Saad, L. (2014). The 40 hour work week is actually longer – by 
7 hours. Gallop. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/
175286/hour-workweek-actually-longer-seven-hours.aspx 

Salmon, P. (2001). Effects of physical exercise on anxiety, depression, 
and sensitivity to stress: A unifying theory. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 21(1), 33–61. 


Salthouse, T. A. (2004). What and when of cognitive aging. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 140–144. Sandgerg-Thoma, 
S. E., Synder, A. R., & Jang, B. J. (2015). Exiting and returning to 
the parental home for boomerang kids. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 77, 806-818. doi:10.1111/jomf.12183 

Sawatzky, R., Ratner, P. A., & Chiu, L. (2005). A meta-analysis of 
the relationship between spirituality and quality of life. Social 
Indicators Research, 72, 153-188. 

Schaie, K. W. (2005). Developmental influences on adult intelligence 
the Seattle longitudinal study. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Scheibe, S., Kunzmann, U. & Baltes, P. B. (2009). New territories 
of Positive Lifespan Development: Wisdom and Life Longings. In 
C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Oxford handbook of Positive 
Psychology (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Schick, V., Herbenick, D., Reece, M., Sanders, S., A., Dodge, B., 
Middlestadt, S. E., & Fortenberry, J. D. (2010). Sexual behaviors, 
condom use, and sexual health of Americans over 50: Implications 
for sexual health promotion for older adults. Journal of Sexual 
Medicine, 7(Suppl. 5), 315-329. 

Schuler, P., Vinci, D., Isosaari, R., Philipp, S., Todorovich, J., Roy, J., & 
Evans, R. (2008). Body-shape perceptions and body mass index of 
older African American and European American women. Journal 
of Cross-Cultural Gerontology, 23(3), 255-264. 

Schulz, R., Newsom, J., Mittelmark, M., Burton, L., Hirsch, C., & 
Jackson, S. (1997). Health effects of caregiving: The caregiver 
health effects study. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 19, 110-116. 

Seccombe, K., & Warner, R. L. (2004). Marriages and families: 
Relationships in social context. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/
Thomson Learning. 

Seltzer, M. M., Floyd, F., Song, J., Greenberg, J., & Hong, J. (2011). 
Midlife and aging parents of adults with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities: Impacts of lifelong parenting. 
American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disability, 
116, 479-499. 


Selye, H. (1946). The general adaptation syndrome and the diseases 
of adaptation. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology, 6, 117– 230. 

Shure, J., & Cahan, V. (1998, September 10). Launch an exercise 
program today, say Aging Institute, Senator John Glenn. National 
Institute on Aging. Retrieved from http://www.nia.nih.gov/
NewsAndEvents/PressReleases/PR19980910Launch.htm 

Slevin, K. F. (2010). “If I had lots of money…I’d have a body makeover”: 
Managing the aging body. Social Forces, 88(3), 1003-1020. 

Sorensen, P., & Cooper, N. J. (2010). Reshaping the family man: A 
grounded theory study of the meaning of grandfatherhood. 
Journal of Men’s Studies, 18(2), 117-136. doi:10.3149/jms.1802.117 

Spiegel, D., Kraemer, H., Bloom, J., & Gottheil, E. (1989). Effect of 
psychosocial treatment on survival of patients with metastatic 
breast cancer. The Lancet, 334, 888–891. 

Stern, C., & Konno, R. (2009). Physical Leisure activities and their 
role in preventing dementia: A systematic review. International 
Journal of Evidence-Based Healthcare, 7, 270-282. 

Stewart, S. D., Manning, W. D., & Smock, P. J. (2003). Union formation 
among men in the US: Does having prior children matter? Journal 
of Marriage and Family, 65, 90 – 104. 

Su, D., Wu, X., Zhang, Y., Li, H., Zhang, J., & Zhou, L. (2012). 
Depression and social support between China’ rural and urban 
empty-nest elderly. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 55,564–569. 

Swierzewski, S. J. (2015). Erectile Dysfunction. Retrieved from 
http://www.healthcommunities.com/erectile- dysfunction/
overview-of-impotence.shtml 

Tangri, S., Thomas, V., & Mednick, M. (2003). Prediction of 
satisfaction among college-educated African American women. 
Journal of Adult Development, 10, 113-125. 

Taylor, B. J., Matthews, K. A., Hasler, B. P., Roecklein, K. A., Kline, C. 
E., Buysse, D. J., Kravitz, H. M., Tiani, A. G., Harlow, S. D., & Hall, 
M. H. (2016). Bedtime variability and metabolic health in midlife 
women: the SWAN Sleep Study. SLEEP, 39(2), 457–465. 

Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, 


R. A., & Updegraff, J. A. (2000). Biobehavioral responses to stress 
in females: Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-flight. Psychological 
Review, 107, 411–429. 

Teachman, J. (2008). Complex life course patterns and the risk of 
divorce in second marriages. Journal of Marriage and Family, 70, 
294 – 305. 

Teuscher, U., & Teuscher, C. (2006). Reconsidering the double 
standard of aging: Effects of gender and sexual orientation on 
facial attractiveness ratings. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 42(4), 631-639. 

Thurston, W. E, & Vissandjée, B. (2005). An ecological model for 
understanding culture as a determinant of women’s health. 
Critical Public Health, 15(3), 229-242. 

Torti, F. M., Gwyther, L. P., Reed, S. D., Friedman, J. Y., & Schulman, 
K. A. (2004). A multinational review of recent trends and reports 
in dementia caregiver burden. Alzheimer Disease and Associated 
Disorders, 18(2), 99-109. 

Tower, R. B., & Kasl, S. V. (1995). Depressive symptoms across older 
spouses and the moderating effect of marital closeness. 
Psychology and Aging, 10, 625– 638. doi:10.1037/0882-7974.10.4.625 

Twisk, J. W., Snel, J., Kemper, H. C., & van Mechelen, W. (1999). 
Changes in daily hassles and life events and the relationship with 
coronary heart disease risk factors: A 2-year longitudinal study 
in 27–29-year-old males and females. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, 46, 229–240. 

Uchida, Y., Nakashima, T., Ando, F., Niino, N., & Shimokata, H. (2003). 
Prevalence of self-perceived auditory problems and their relation 
to audiometric thresholds in a middle-aged to elderly population. 
Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 123(5), 618. 

Umberson, D., Williams, K., Powers, D., Chen, M., & Campbell, A. 
(2005). As good as it gets? A life course perspective on marital 
quality. Social Forces, 81, 493-511. 

United Health Foundation. (2016). New report finds significant health 
concerns loom for seniors in coming years. Retrieved from 


http://www.unitedhealthfoundation.org/News/Articles/Feeds/
2016/052516AHRSeniorReport.aspx?r=3 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016). American time use survey 
– 2015. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/
atus.pdf 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. (2015) 2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans. 8th Edition. Retrieved from http://health.gov/
dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/ 

U.S. Department of Labor (2016). Vacation Leave. Retrieved from 
https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/workhours/vacation_leave 

U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2012). Unemployed older 
workers: Many experience challenges regaining employment and 
face reduced retirement security. Retrieved from 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-445 

Vaillant, G. E. (1977). Adaptation of life. Boston, MA: Little, Brown 

Vaillant, G. E. (2008). Spiritual evolution: A scientific defense of faith. 
New York: Doubleday Broadway. Vaillant, G. E. (2012). Triumphs of 
experience. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Waldrop, D., Weber, J., Herald, S., Pruett, J., Cooper, K., & 
Juozapavicius, K. (1999). Wisdom and life experience: How 
grandfathers mentor their grandchildren. Journal of Aging and 
Identity, 4 (1), 33-46. 

Wang, W. & Parker, K. (2014) Record share of Americans have never 
married: As values, economics and gender patterns change. 
Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/09/24/
record-share-of-americans-have-never-married/ 

WebMD. (2016). Erectile Dysfunction: Testosterone Replacement 
Therapy. Retrieved from http://www.webmd.com/erectile- 
dysfunction/guide/testosterone-replacement-
therapy?page=2#3 

Willis, S. L., & Schaie, K. W. (1999). Intellectual functioning in midlife. 
In S. L. Willis & J. D. Reid (Eds.), Life in the Middle: Psychological 
and Social Development in Middle Age (pp. 233-247). San Diego: 
Academic. 


Wong, Y. C., & Leung, J. (2012). Long-term care in China: Issues and 
prospects. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 55, 570–586. 

World Health Organization. (2018). Top 10 causes of death. Retrieved 
from https://www.who.int/gho/mortality_burden_disease/
causes_death/top_10/en/ 

World Health Organization. (2019). Burn-out an “occupational 
phenomenon”: International Classification of Diseases. Retrieved 
from: https://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/burn-
out/en/ 

Wu, Z., Sun, L., Sun, Y., Zhang, X., Tao, F., & Cui, G. (2010). Correlation 
between loneliness and social relationship among empty nest 
elderly in Anhui rural area, China. Aging and Mental Health, 14,108–112. 

Yeager, C. A., Hyer, L. A., Hobbs, B., & Coyne, A. C., (2010). Alzheimer’s 
disease and vascular dementia: The complex relationship between 
diagnosis and caregiver burden. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 
31(6), 376-384. 

Yick-Flanagan, A. (2013). Meanings of menopause: Cultural 
considerations. Retrieved from http://www.netce.com/
coursecontent.php?courseid=976 

Zuidema, S. U., de Jonghe, J. F., Verhey, F. R., & Koopman, R. T. 
(2009). Predictors of neuropsychiatric symptoms in nursing home 
patients: Influence of gender and dementia severity. International 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 24(10), 1079-1086. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 8 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 26: Cognitive 
Development in Middle 
Adulthood 

Chapter 26 Learning Objectives 

Describe crystallized versus fluid intelligence 
Describe research from the Seattle Longitudinal 
Study 
Explain the importance of flow to creativity and life 
satisfaction 
Describe how middle adults are turning to college 
for advanced training 
Describe the difference between an expert and a 
novice 
Describe the changes in the U.S. workforce, 
especially among middle adults 
Explain the importance of leisure to mental health 
and a successful retirement 



Crystalized versus Fluid Intelligence 

Intelligence is influenced by heredity, culture, social contexts, 
personal choices, and certainly age. One distinction in specific 
intelligence noted in adulthood is between fluid intelligence, which 
refers to the capacity to learn new ways of solving problems and 
performing activities quickly and abstractly and 
crystallized 
intelligence, which refers to the accumulated knowledge of the world 
we have acquired throughout our lives (Salthouse, 2004). This 
intelligence is distinct, and crystallized intelligence increases with 
age, while fluid intelligence tends to decrease with age (Horn, 
Donaldson, & Engstrom, 1981; Salthouse, 2004). 

Research demonstrates that older adults have more crystallized 
intelligence as reflected in semantic knowledge, vocabulary, and 
language. As a result, adults generally outperform younger people 
on measures of history, geography, and even on crossword puzzles, 
where this information is useful (Salthouse, 2004). It is this superior 
knowledge, combined with a slower and more complete processing 
style, along with a more sophisticated understanding of the 
workings 

of the world around them, that gives older adults the advantage of 
“wisdom” over the advantages of fluid intelligence which favors the 
young (Baltes, Staudinger, & Lindenberger, 1999; Scheibe, 
Kunzmann, & Baltes, 2009). 


The differential changes in crystallized versus fluid intelligence 
help explain why older adults do not necessarily show poorer 
performance on tasks that also require experience (i.e., crystallized 
intelligence), although they show poorer memory overall. A young 
chess player may think more quickly, for instance, but a more 
experienced chess player has more knowledge to draw on. 

Seattle Longitudinal Study: The Seattle Longitudinal Study has 
tracked the cognitive abilities of adults since 1956. Every seven 
years the current participants are evaluated, and new individuals 
are also added. Approximately 6000 people have participated thus 
far, and 26 people from the original group are still in the study 
today. Current results demonstrate that middle-aged adults 
perform better on four out of six cognitive tasks than those same 
individuals did when they were young adults. Verbal memory, 
spatial skills, inductive reasoning (generalizing from particular 
examples), and vocabulary increase with age until one’s 70s (Schaie, 
2005; Willis & Shaie, 1999). However, numerical computation and 
perceptual speed decline in middle and late adulthood (see Figure 
8.18). 


Cognitive skills in the aging brain have been studied extensively in 
pilots, and similar to the Seattle Longitudinal Study results, older 
pilots show declines in processing speed and memory capacity, but 
their overall performance seems to remain intact. According to 
Phillips (2011), researchers tested pilots age 40 to 69 as they 
performed on flight simulators. Older pilots took longer to learn to 
use the simulators but performed better than younger pilots at 
avoiding collisions. 

Flow is the mental state of being completely present and fully 
absorbed in a task (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). When in a state of flow, 
the individual is able to block outside distractions and the mind is 
fully open to producing. Additionally, the person is achieving great 
joy or intellectual satisfaction from the activity and accomplishing a 
goal. Further, when in a state of flow, the individual is not concerned 
with extrinsic rewards. Csikszentmihalyi (1996) used his theory of 
flow to research how some people exhibit high levels of creativity as 
he believed that a state of flow is an important factor in creativity 
(Kaufman & Gregoire, 2016). Other characteristics of creative people 
identified by Csikszentmihalyi (1996) include curiosity and drive, 
value for intellectual endeavors, and an ability to lose our sense of 
self and feel a part of something greater. In addition, he believed 
that the tortured creative person was a myth and that creative 


people were very happy with their lives. According to Nakamura 
and Csikszentmihalyi (2002), people describe flow as the height of 
enjoyment. The more they experience it, the more they judge their 
lives to be gratifying. The qualities that allow for flow are well-
developed in middle adulthood. 

Tacit knowledge is the knowledge that is pragmatic or practical 
and learned through experience rather than explicitly taught, and it 
also increases with age (Hedlund, Antonakis, & Sternberg, 2002). 
Tacit knowledge might be thought of as “know-how” or 
“professional instinct.” It is referred to as tacit because it cannot be 
codified or written down. It does not involve academic knowledge, 
rather it involves being able to use skills and to problem-solve in 
practical ways. Tacit knowledge can be understood in the workplace 
and used by blue-collar workers, such as carpenters, chefs, and 
hairdressers. 

Middle Adults Returning to Education 


Midlife adults in the United States often find themselves in college 
classrooms. In fact, the rate of enrollment for older Americans 
entering college, often part-time or in the evenings, is rising faster 
than traditionally aged students. Students over age 35, accounted 
for 17% of all college and graduate students in 2009, and are 
expected to comprise 19% of that total by 2020 (Holland, 2014). In 
some cases, older students are developing skills and expertise in 
order to launch a second career or to take their career in a new 
direction. Whether they enroll in school to sharpen particular skills, 
to retool and reenter the workplace, or to pursue interests that 
have previously been neglected, older students tend to approach 
the learning process differently than younger college students 
(Knowles, Holton, & Swanson, 1998). 

The mechanics of cognition, such as working memory and speed of 


processing, gradually decline with age. However, they can be easily 
compensated for through the use of higher-order cognitive skills, 
such as forming strategies to enhance memory or summarizing 
and comparing ideas rather than relying on rote memorization 
(Lachman, 2004). Although older students may take a bit longer to 
learn the material, they are less likely to forget it quickly. Adult 
learners tend to look for relevance and meaning when learning 
information. Older adults have the hardest time learning material 
that is meaningless or unfamiliar. They are more likely to ask 
themselves, “Why is this important?” when being introduced to 
information or when trying to memorize concepts or facts. Older 
adults are more task-oriented learners and want to organize their 
activity around problem-solving. 

Rubin et al. (2018) surveyed university students aged 17-70 
regarding their satisfaction and approach to learning in college. 
Results indicated that older students were more independent, 
inquisitive, and motivated intrinsically compared to younger 
students. Additionally, older women processed information at a 
deeper learning level and expressed more satisfaction with their 
education. 

To address the educational needs of those over 50, The American 
Association of Community Colleges (2016) developed the Plus 50 
Initiative that assists community college in creating or expanding 
programs that focus on workforce training and new careers for the 
plus-50 population. Since 2008 the program has provided grants 
for programs to 138 community colleges affecting over 37, 000 
students. The participating colleges offer workforce training 
programs that prepare 50 plus adults for careers in such fields as 
early childhood educators, certified nursing assistants, substance 
abuse counselors, adult basic education instructors, and human 
resources specialists. These training programs are especially 
beneficial as 80% of people over the age of 50 say they will retire 
later in life than their parents or continue to work in retirement, 
including in a new field. 


Gaining Expertise: The Novice and the Expert 


Expertise refers to specialized skills and knowledge that pertain to a 
particular topic or activity. In contrast, a novice is someone who has 
limited experiences with a particular task. Everyone develops some 
level of “selective” expertise in things that are personally meaningful 
to them, such as making bread, quilting, computer programming, 
or diagnosing illness. Expert thought is often characterized as 
intuitive, automatic, strategic, and flexible. 

Intuitive: Novices follow particular steps and rules when 
problem-solving, whereas experts can call upon a vast amount 
of knowledge and past experience. As a result, their actions 
appear more intuitive than formulaic. Novice cooks may 
slavishly follow the recipe step by step, while chefs may glance 
at recipes for ideas and then follow their own procedure. 
Automatic: Complex thoughts and actions become more 
routine for experts. Their reactions appear instinctive over 
time, and this is because expertise allows us to processinformation faster and more effectively (Crawford & Channon, 
2002). 
Strategic: Experts have more effective strategies than non-
experts. For instance, while both skilled and novice doctors 
generate several hypotheses within minutes of an encounter 
with a patient, the more skilled clinicians’ conclusions are 
likely to be more accurate. In other words, they generate 
better hypotheses than the novice. This is because they are 
able to discount misleading symptoms and other distractors 
and hone in on the most likely problem the patient is 
experiencing (Norman, 2005). Consider how your note-taking 
skills may have changed after being in school over a number of 
years. 
Chances are you do not write down everything the 
instructor says, but the more central ideas. You may have even 
come up with your own short forms for commonly mentioned 



words in a course, allowing you to take down notes faster and 
more efficiently than someone who may be a novice academic 
note taker. 
Flexible: Experts in all fields are more curious and creative; 
they enjoy a challenge and experiment with new ideas or 
procedures. The only way for experts to grow in their 
knowledge is to take on more challenging, rather than routine 
tasks. 


Expertise takes time. It is a long-process resulting from experience 
and practice (Ericsson, Feltovich, & Prietula, 2006). Middle-aged 
adults, with their store of knowledge and experience, are likely 
to find that when faced with a problem they have likely faced 
something similar before. This allows them to ignore the irrelevant 
and focus on the important aspects of the issue. Expertise is one 
reason why many people often reach the top of their careers in 
middle adulthood. 

However, expertise cannot fully make-up for all losses in general 
cognitive functioning as we age. The superior performance of older 
adults in comparison to younger novices appears to be task-specific 
(Charness & Krampe, 2006). As we age, we also need to be more 
deliberate in our practice of skills in order to maintain them. 
Charness and Krampe (2006) in their review of the literature on 
aging and expertise, also note that the rate of return for our effort 
diminishes as we age. In other words, increasing practice does not 
recoup the same advances in older adults as similar efforts do at 
younger ages. 

Work at Midlife 


Who is the U.S. workforce? The civilian, non-institutionalized 
workforce; the population of those aged 16 and older, who are 
employed has steadily declined since it reached its peak in the late 


1990s when 67% of the civilian workforce population was employed. 
In 2012 the rate had dropped to 64% and by 2019 it declined to 
62.9% (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). The U.S. population is 
expected to grow more slowly based on census projections for the 
next few years. Those new entrants to the labor force, adults age 16 
to 24, are the only population of adults that will shrink in size over 
the next few years by nearly half a percent, while those age 55 and 
up will grow by 2.3% over current rates, and those age 65 to 74 will 
grow by nearly 4% (Monthly Labor Review (MLR), 2013). In 1992, 26% 
of the population was 55+, by 2022 it is projected to be 38%. Table 
8.8 shows the rates of employment by age. In 2002, baby boomers 
were between the ages of 38 to 56, the prime employment group. 
In 2012, the youngest baby boomers were 48 and the oldest had just 
retired (age 66). These changes might explain some of the steady 
declines in work participation as this large population cohort ages 
out of the workforce. 

In 2012, 53% of the workforce was male. For both genders and for 
most age groups the rate of participation in the labor force has 
declined from 2002 to 2012, and it is projected to decline further 
by 2022. The exception is among the older middle-age groups (the 
baby boomers), and especially for women 55 and older. 

Hispanic males have the highest rate of participation in the labor 


force. In 2012, 76% of Hispanic males, compared with 71% of White, 
72% of Asians, and 64% of Black men ages 16 or older were 
employed. Among women, Black women were more likely to be 
participating in the workforce (58%) compared with almost 57% of 
Hispanic and Asian, and 55% of White females. The rates for all 
racial and ethnic groups are expected to decline by 2022 (MLR, 
2013). 

Climate in the Workplace for Middle-aged Adults: A number of 
studies have found that job satisfaction tends to peak in middle 
adulthood (Besen, Matz-Costa, Brown, Smyer, & Pitt- Catsouphers, 
2013; Easterlin, 2006). This satisfaction stems from not only higher 
wages, but often greater involvement in decisions that affect the 
workplace as they move from worker to supervisor or manager. Job 
satisfaction is also influenced by being able to do the job well, and 
after years of experience at a job, many people are more effective 
and productive. Another reason for this peak in job satisfaction 
is that at midlife many adults lower their expectations and goals 
(Tangri, Thomas, & Mednick, 2003). Middle-aged employees may 
realize they have reached the highest they are likely to in their 
careers. This satisfaction at work translates into lower absenteeism, 
greater productivity, and less job-hopping in comparison to 
younger adults (Easterlin, 2006). 

However, not all middle-aged adults are happy in the workplace. 
Women may find themselves up against the glass ceiling. This may 
explain why females employed at large corporations are twice as 
likely to quit their jobs as are men (Barreto, Ryan, & Schmitt, 2009). 
Another problem older workers may encounter is job burnout, 
defined as unsuccessfully managed workplace stress (World Health 
Organization, 2019). Burnout consists of: 

Feelings of energy depletion or exhaustion 
Increased mental distance from one’s job, or feelings of job 
negativism or cynicism 
Reduced professional efficacy 



American workers may experience more burnout than do workers 
in many other developed nations because most developed nations 
guarantee by law a set number of paid vacation days (International 
Labour Organization, ILO, 2011), the United States does not (U.S. 
Department of Labor, 2016). 

Not all employees are covered under overtime pay laws (U.S. 
Department of Labor, 2016). This is important when you considered 
that the 40-hour workweek is a myth for most Americans. Only 4 
in 10 U.S. workers work the typical 40-hour workweek. The average 
workweek for many is almost a full day longer (47 hours), with 39% 
working 50 or more hours per week (Saad, 2014). In comparison to 
workers in many other developed nations, American workers work 
more hours per year (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, OECD, 2016). As can be seen in Figure 8.20, Americans 
work more hours than most European nations, especially western 


and northern Europe, although they work fewer hours than workers 
in other nations, especially Mexico. 

Challenges in the Workplace for Middle-aged Adults: In recent 
years middle-aged adults have been challenged by economic 
downturns, starting in 2001, and again in 2008. Fifty-five percent 
of adults reported some problems in the workplace, such as fewer 
hours, pay-cuts, having to switch to part-time, etc., during the 
most recent economic recession (see Figure 8.21, Pew Research 
Center, 2010a). While young adults took the biggest hit in terms of 
levels of unemployment, middle-aged adults also saw their overall 
financial resources suffer as their retirement nest eggs disappeared 
and house values shrank, while foreclosures increased (Pew 
Research Center, 2010b). Not surprisingly this age group reported 
that the recession hit them worse than did other age groups, 
especially those aged 50-64. Middle-aged adults who find 
themselves unemployed are likely to remain unemployed longer 
than those in early adulthood (U.S. Government Accountability 
Office, 2012). In the eyes of employers, it may be more cost-effective 
to hire a young adult, despite their limited experience, as they would 
be starting out at lower levels of the pay scale. In addition, hiring 
someone who is 25 and has many years of work ahead of them 
versus someone who is 55 and will likely retire in 10 years may 
also be part of the decision to hire a younger worker (Lachman, 
2004). American workers are also competing with global markets 
and changes in technology. Those who are able to keep up with all 
these changes or are willing to uproot and move around the country 
or even the world have a better chance of finding work. The decision 
to move may be easier for people who are younger and have fewer 
obligations to others. 


Leisure 

 


As most developed nations restrict the number of hours an 
employer can demand that an employee work per week, and require 


, referred to as 
employers to offer paid vacation time, what do middle-aged adults 
do with their time off from work and dutiesleisure? 
Around the world, the most common leisure activity in both early 
and middle adulthood is watching television (Marketing Charts 
Staff, 2014). On average, middle-aged adults spend 2-3 hours per day 
watching TV (Gripsrud, 2007) and watching TV accounts for more 
than half of all the leisure time (see Figure 8.22). 

In the United States, men spend about 5 hours more per week in 
leisure activities, especially on weekends, than do women (Drake, 
2013; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2016). The leisure gap between 
mothers and fathers is slightly smaller, about 3 hours a week, than 
among those without children under age 18 (Drake, 2013). Those 
age 35-44 spend less time on leisure activities than any other age 
group, 15 or older (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2016). This is not 
surprising as this age group is more likely to be parents and still 
working up the ladder of their career, so they may feel they have less 
time for leisure. 


Americans have less leisure time than people in many other 
developed nations. As you read earlier, there are no laws in many 
job sectors guaranteeing paid vacation time in the United States (see 
Figure 8.23). Ray, Sanes, and Schmitt (2013) report that several other 
nations also provide additional time off for young and older workers 
and for shift workers. In the United States, those in higher-paying 
jobs and jobs covered by a union contract are more likely to have 
paid vacation time and holidays (Ray & Schmitt, 2007). 

But do U.S. workers take their time off? According to Project 
Time-Off (2016), 55% of U.S. workers in 2015 did not take all of 
their paid vacation and holiday leave. A large percentage of this 
leave is lost. It cannot be rolled over into the next year or paid 
out. A total of 658 million vacation days or an average of 2 vacation 
days per worker was lost in 2015. The reasons most often given for 
not taking time off was worry that there would be a mountain of 
work to return to (40%), a concern that no one else could do the 
job (35%), not being able to afford a vacation (33%), feeling it was 
harder to take time away when you have or are moving up in the 
company (33%), and not wanting to seem replaceable (22%). Since 
2000, more American workers are willing to work for free rather 


than take the time that is allowed to them. A lack of support from 
their boss and even their colleagues to take a vacation is often 
a driving force in deciding to forgo time off. In fact, 80% of the 
respondents to the survey above said they would take time away if 
they felt they had support from their boss. Two-thirds reported that 
they hear nothing, mixed messages, or discouraging remarks about 
taking their time off. Almost a third (31%) feel they should contact 
their workplace, even while on vacation. 

The benefits of taking time away from work: Several studies have 
noted the benefits of taking time away from work. It reduces job 
stress burnout (Nimrod, Kleiber, & Berdychevesky, 2012), improves 
both mental health (Qian, Yarnal, & Almeida, 2013) and physical 
health (Stern & Konno, 2009), especially if that leisure time also 
includes moderate physical activity (Lee et al., 2015). Leisure 
activities can also improve productivity and job satisfaction (Kühnel 
& Sonnentag, 2011) and help adults deal with balancing family and 
work obligations (Lee, et al., 2015). 

References 

AARP. (2009). The divorce experience: A study of divorce at midlife 
and beyond. Washington, DC: AARP 

Ahlborg, T., Misvaer, N., & Möller, A. (2009). Perception of marital 
quality by parents with small children: A follow-up study when the 
firstborn is 4 years old. Journal of Family Nursing, 15, 237–263. 

Alterovitz, S. S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2013). Relationship goals of 
middle-aged, young-old, and old-old Internet daters: An analysis 
of online personal ads. Journal of Aging Studies, 27, 159–165. 
doi.10.1016/j.jaging.2012.12.006 

American Association of Community Colleges (2016). Plus 50 
community colleges: Ageless learning. Retrieved from 
http://plus50.aacc.nche.edu/Pages/Default.aspx 


American Cancer Society. (2019). Cancer Facts and Figures 2019.
Retrieved from https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer- 
org/research/cancer-facts-and-statistics/annual-cancer-facts-
and-figures/2019/cancer-facts-and-figures-2019.pdf 

American Diabetes Association (2016). Standards of medical care in 
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 39(1), 1-112. 

American Heart Association (2016). Saturated fats. Retrieved from 
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/HealthyLiving/
HealthyEating/Nutrition/Saturated-
Fats_UCM_301110_Article.jsp 

American Psychological Association (2017). Stress in America: The 
state of our nation. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/images/
state-nation_tcm7-225609.pdf 

American Psychological Association (2016). By the numbers: Hearing 
loss and mental health. Monitor on Psychology, 47(4), 9. 

Anderson, E. R., & Greene, S. M. (2011). “My child and I are a package 
deal”: Balancing adult and child concerns in repartnering after 
divorce. Journal of Family Psychology, 25(5), 741-750. 

Anderson, E.R., Greene, S.M., Walker, L., Malerba, C.A., Forgatch, 
M.S., & DeGarmo, D.S. (2004). Ready to take a chance again: 
Transitions into dating among divorced parents. Journal of 
Divorce and Remarriage, 40, 61-75. 

Aquilino, W. (1991). Predicting parents’ experiences with coresidence 
adult children. Journal of Family Issues, 12(3), 323-342. 

Arai, Y., Sugiura, M., Miura, H., Washio, M., & Kudo, K. (2000). Undue 
concern for other’s opinions deters caregivers of impaired elderly 
from using public services in rural Japan. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(10), 961- 968. 

Armour, S. (2007, August 2). Friendships and work: A good or bad 
partnership? USA Today. Retrieved from 
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/workplace/
2007-08-01-work-friends_N.htm 

Avis, N. E., Stellato, R., & Crawford, S. (2001). Is there a menopausal 
syndrome? Menopausal status and symptoms across racial/
ethnic groups. Social Science and Medicine, 52(3), 345-356. 


Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., & Lindenberger, U. (1999). Lifespan 
Psychology: Theory and Application to Intellectual Functioning. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 471-507. 

Bargh, J. A., McKenna, K. Y. A, & Fitsimons, G. G. (2002). Can you 
see the real me? Activation and expression of the true self on the 
Internet. Journal of Social Issues, 58, 33–48. 

Barreto, M., Ryan, M. K., & Schmitt, M. T. (2009). The glass ceiling 
in the 21st century: Understanding the barriers to gender equality. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Baruch, G., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1984). Women in midlife. New York: 
Plenum. 

Beach, S. R., Schulz, R., Yee, J. L., & Jackson, S. (2000). Negative 
and positive health effects of caring for a disabled spouse: 
Longitudinal findings from the caregiver health effects study. 
Psychology and Aging, 15(2), 259-271. 

Beit-Hallahmi, B., & Argyle, M. (1998). Religious behavior, belief, and 
experience. New York: Routledge. 

Bengtson, V. L. (2001). Families, intergenerational relationships, and 
kinkeeping in midlife. In N. M. Putney (Author) & M. E. Lachman 
(Ed.), Handbook of midlife development (pp. 528-579). New York: 
Wiley. 

Berglund, L., Oliver, E. H., Fontanez, N., Holleran, S., Matthews, K., 
Roheim, P. S., & DELTA Investigators. (1999). HDL- subpopulation 
patterns in response to reductions in dietary total and saturated 
fat intakes in healthy subjects. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 70, 992-1000. 

Berkeley Wellness. (2011). The lowdown on low testosterone. 
Retrieved from http://www.berkeleywellness.com/self- care/
sexual-health/article/lowdown-low-testosterone 

Besen, E., Matz-Costa, C., Brown, M., Smyer, M. A., & Pitt-
Catsouphers, M. (2013). Job characteristics, core self-evaluations, 
and job satisfaction. International Journal of Aging & Human 
Development, 76(4), 269-295. 

Billings, A. G., & Moos, R. H. (1981). The role of coping responses and 


social resources in attenuating the stress of life events. Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine, 4, 139–157. 

Birditt, K. S., & Antonucci, T.C. (2012). Till death do us part: Contexts 
and implications of marriage, divorce, and remarriage across 
adulthood. Research in Human Development, 9(2), 103-105. 

Borland, D. C. (1982). A cohort analysis approach to the empty-nest 
syndrome among three ethnic groups of women: A theoretical 
position. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 44, 117–129. 

Borzumato-Gainey, C., Kennedy, A., McCabe, B., & Degges-White, S. 
(2009). Life satisfaction, self-esteem, and subjective age in women 
across the life span. Adultspan Journal, 8(1), 29-42. 

Bouchard, G. (2013). How do parents reaction when their children 
leave home: An integrative review. Journal of Adult Development, 
21, 69-79. 

Bromberger, J. T., Kravitz, H. M., & Chang, Y. (2013). Does risk for 
anxiety increase during the menopausal transition? Study of 
Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN). Menopause, 20(5), 
488-495. 

Brown, L. H., & DeRycke, S. B. (2010). The kinkeeping connection: 
Continuity, crisis and consensus. Journal of Intergenerational 
Relationships, 8(4), 338-353, DOI: 10.1080/15350770.2010.520616 

Brown, S. L., & Lin, I. (2013). The gray divorce revolution: Rising 
divorce among middle aged and older adults 1990-2010. National 
Center for Family & Marriage Research Working Paper Series. 
Bowling Green State University. https://www.bgsu.edu/content/
dam/BGSU/college-of-arts-and- sciences/NCFMR/ 
documents/Lin/The-Gray- Divorce.pdf 

Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). The employment situation-June 
2019. Retrieved from: https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/
empsit.pdf 

Busse, E. W. (1969). Theories of aging. In E. W. Busse & E/. Pfeiffer 
(Eds.), Behavior and adaptation in later life (pp. 11-31). Boston, MA: 
Little Brown. 

Carmichael, C. L., Reis, H. T., & Duberstein, P. R. (2015). In your 20s 
it’s quantity, in your 30s it’s quality: The prognostic value of social 


activity across 30 years of adulthood. Psychology and Aging, 30(1), 
95-105. 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., & Weintraub, J. K. (1989). Assessing 
coping strategies: A theoretically based approach. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 267–283. 

Center for Sexual Health Promotion. (2010). National survey of 
sexual health and behavior. Retrieved from 
http://www.sexualhealth.indiana.edu 

Centers for Disease Control (2014a). About high blood pressure. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/about.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014b). Behaviors that 
increase the risk for high blood pressure. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/behavior.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014c). Measuring high 
blood pressure. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/
bloodpressure/measure.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014d). National 
diabetes statistics report, 2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/national-
diabetes-report-web.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014e). Diagnoses of 
HIV infection among adults aged 50 years and older in the United 
States and dependent areas 2010–2014. HIV surveillance report, 
21(2), 1-69. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/
reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-supplemental-
report-vol-21-2.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Facts about high 
cholesterol. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/cholesterol/
facts.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). The National 
Center for Health Statistics. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/index.htm 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). National diabetes 
statistics report, 2017. Retrieved from: https://www.cdc.gov/
diabetes/pdfs/data/statistics/national-diabetes-statistics-
report.pdf 

Chang, Y. F., An, Y., Bigel, M., Wong, D. F., Troncoso, J. C., O’Brien, 
R. J., Breitner, J. C., Ferruci, L., Resnick, S. M., & Thanbisetty, 
M. (2016). Midlife adiposity predicts earlier onset of Alzheimer’s 
dementia, neuropathology and presymptomatic cerebral amyloid 
accumulation. Molecular Psychiatry, 21(7), 910-915. 

Charness, N., & Krampe, R. T. (2006). Aging and expertise. In K. 
Ericsson, N. Charness & P. Feltovich (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook 
of expertise and expert performance. Cambridge, United Kingdom: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Cherlin, A. J., & Furstenberg, F. F. (1986). The new American 
grandparent: A place in the family, a life apart. New York: Basic 
Books. 

Cohen, S., & Wills, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, and the 
buffering hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 310–357. 

Crawford, S. & Channon, S. (2002). Dissociation between 
performance on abstract tests of executive function and problem 
solving in real life type situations in normal aging. Aging and 
Mental Health, 6, 12-21. 

Crist, L. A., Champagne, C. M., Corsino, L., Lien, L. F., Zhang, G., 
& Young, D. R. (2012). Influence of change in aerobic fitness and 
weight on prevalence of metabolic syndrome. Preventing Chronic 
Disease 9,110171. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd9.110171 

Crowson, C. S., Matteson, E. L., Myasoedova, E., Michet, C. J., Ernste, 
F. C., Warrington, K. J., …Gabriel, S. E. (2011). The lifetime risk 
of adult-onset rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory 
autoimmune rheumatic diseases. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 63(3), 
633-639. doi: 10.1002/art.30155. 

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal 
experience. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. 

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology of 
discovery and invention. New York: Harper 


Collins. Dawes, P., DicMonrokinson, C., Emsley, R., Bishop, P. N., 
Cruickshanks, K. J., Edmundson-Jones, M., …. Munro, K. (2014). 
Vision impairment and dual sensory problems in middle age. 
Ophthalmic Physiological Optics, 34, 479–488. doi: 10.1111/
opo.12138479 

Degges-White, S., & Myers, J, E. (2006). Women at midlife: An 
exploration of chronological age, subjective age, wellness, and life 
satisfaction, Adultspan Journal, 5, 67-80. 

DeLongis, A., Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1988). The impact of daily 
stress on health and mood: Psychological and social resources 
as mediators. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 
486–495. 

Dennerstein, L., Dudley, E., & Guthrie, J. (2002). Empty nest or 
revolving door? A prospective study of women’s quality of life in 
midlife during the phase of children leaving and re-entering the 
home. Psychological Medicine, 32, 545–550. 

DePaulo, B. (2014). A singles studies perspective on mount marriage. 
Psychological Inquiry, 25(1), 64-68. doi: 10.1080/
1047840X.2014.878173 

Desilver, D. (2016). In the U. S. and abroad, more young adults are 
living with their parents. Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/05/24/in-the-
u-s-and-abroad-more-young-adults-are-living-with-their- 
parents/ 

de St. Aubin, E., & Mc Adams, D. P. (1995). The relation of generative 
concern and generative action to personality traits, satisfaction/
happiness with life and ego development. Journal of Adult 
Development, 2, 99-112. 

De Vaus, D. & McAllister, I. (1987). Gender differences in religion: 
A test of the structural location theory. American Sociological 
Review, 52, 472-481. 

Dew, M. A., Hoch, C. C., Buysse, D. J., Monk, T. H., Begley, A. E., 
Houck, P. R.,…Reynolds, C. F., III. (2003). Healthy older adults’ 


sleep predicts all-cause mortality at 4 to 19 years of follow-up. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 65(1), 63–73. 

Dimah, K., & Dimah, A. (2004). Intimate relationships and sexual 
attitudes of older African American men and women. The 
Gerontologist, 44, 612-613. 

Drake, B. (2013). Another gender gap: Men spend more time in leisure 
activities. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/06/10/another-
gender-gap-men-spend-more-time-in-leisure-activities/ 

Dunér, A., & Nordstrom, M. (2007). The roles and functions of the 
informal support networks of older people who receive formal 
support: A Swedish qualitative study. Ageing & Society, 27, 67– 85. 
doi:10.1017/ S0144686X06005344 

Easterlin, R. A. (2006). Life cycle happiness and its sources: 
Intersections of psychology, economics, and demography. Journal 
of Economic Psychology, 27, 463-482. 

Eastley, R., & Wilcock, G. K. (1997). Prevalence and correlates of 
aggressive behaviors occurring in patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 12, 484-487. 

Elsesser, L., & Peplau, L. A. (2006). The glass partition: Obstacles to 
cross-sex friendships at work. Human Relations, 59(8), 1077–1100. 

Emslie, C., Hunt, K., & Lyons, A. (2013. The role of alcohol in forging 
and maintaining friendships amongst Scottish men in midlife. 
Health Psychology, 32(10, 33-41. 

Ericsson, K. A., Feltovich, P. J., & Prietula, M. J. (2006). Studies of 
expertise from psychological perspectives. In K. Ericsson, N. 
Charness & P. Feltovich (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of expertise 
and expert performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Erikson, E. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton & 
Company. Erikson, E. (1959). Identity and the life cycle. New York: 
Norton & Company. Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed.
New York: Norton & Company. 

Fehr, B. (2008). Friendship formation. In S. Sprecher, A. Wenzel, & J. 


Harvey (Eds.), Handbook of Relationship Initiation (pp.29–54). New 
York, NY: Psychology Press. 

Ferrie, J. E., Shipley, M. J., Cappuccio, F. P., Brunner, E., Miller, M. A., 
Kumari, M., & Marmot, M. G. (2007). A prospective study of change 
in sleep duration: Associations with mortality in the Whitehall II 
cohort. Sleep, 30(12), 1659. 

Ford, E. S., Li, C., & Zhao, G. (2010). Prevalence and correlates of 
metabolic syndrome based on a harmonious definition among 
adults in the US. Journal of Diabetes, 2(3), 180-193. 

Friedman, M., & Rosenman, R. (1959). Association of specific overt 
behaviour pattern with blood and cardiovascular findings. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 169, 1286–1296. 

Fry, R. (2017). It’s becoming more common for young adults to live 
at home-and for longer stretches. Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/05/05/its-
becoming-more-common-for-young-adults-to-live-at-home-
and- for-longer-stretches/ft_17-05-03_livingathome_bygen2/ 

Füllgrabe, C., Moore, B. C. J., & Stone, M. A. (2015). Age-group 
differences in speech identification despite matched audio 
metrically normal hearing: contributions from auditory temporal 
processing and cognition. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 6, 
1-25. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2014.00347 

Fung, H. H. (2013). Aging in culture. Gerontologist, 53(3), 369-377. 

Gerstel, N., & Gallagher, S. K. (1993). Kinkeeping and distress: 
Gender, recipients of care, and work–family conflict. Journal of 
Marriage and the Family, 55, 598–607. 

Gibbons, C., Creese, J., Tran, M., Brazil, K., Chambers, L., Weaver, B., 
& Bedard, M. (2014). The psychological and health consequences 
of caring for a spouse with dementia: A critical comparison of 
husbands and wives. Journal of Women & Aging, 26, 3-21. 

Gilleard, C., & Higgs, P. (2000). Cultures of aging: Self, citizen and the 
body. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Publishers. 

Goldscheider, F., & Kaufman, G. (2006). Willingness to stepparent: 


Attitudes about partners who already have children. Journal of 
Family Issues, 27, 1415 – 1436. 

Goldscheider, F., & Sassler, S. (2006). Creating stepfamilies: 
Integrating children into the study of union formation. Journal of 
Marriage and Family, 68, 275 – 291. 

Gorchoff, S. M., John, O. P., & Helson, R. (2008). Contextualizing 
change in marital satisfaction during middle age. Psychological 
Science, 19, 1194–1200. 

Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (2000). The timing of divorce: 
Predicting when a couple will divorce over a 14-year period. 
Journal of Marriage & the Family, 62, 737-745. 

Greene, S. M., Anderson, E. R., Hetherington, E., Forgtch, M. S., 
& DeGarmo, D. S. (2003). Risk and resilience after divorce. In 
F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal family processes: Growing diversity and 
complexity (3rd ed., pp. 96-120). New York: Guilford Press. 

Greenfield, E. A., & Marks, N. F. (2006). Linked lives: Adult children’s 
problems and their parents’ psychological and relational well-
being. Journal of Marriage and Family, 68, 442-454. 

Greenfield, E. A., Vaillant, G. E., & Marks, N. F. (2009). Do formal 
religious participation and spiritual perceptions have 
independent linkages with diverse dimensions of psychological 
well-being? Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 50, 196-212. 

Gripsrud, J. (2007). Television and the European public sphere. 
European Journal of Communication, 22, 479-492. 

Grzywacz, J. G. & Keyes, C. L. (2004). Toward health promotion: 
Physical and social behaviors in complete health. Journal of Health 
Behavior, 28(2), 99-111. 

Ha, J., Hong, J., Seltzer, M. M., & Greenberg, J. S. (2008). Age and 
gender differences in the well-being of midlife and aging parents 
with children with mental health or developmental problems: 
Report of a national study. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 
49, 301-316. 

Harrison, J., Barrow, S., Gask, L., & Creed, F. (1999). Social 
determinants of GHQ score by postal survey. Journal of Public 
Health Medicine, 21, 283–288. doi:10.1093/pubmed/21.3.283 


Hawkley, L. C., Hughes, M. E., Waite, L. J., Masi, C. M., Thisted, 
R. A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2008). From social structural factors to 
perceptions of relationship quality and loneliness: The Chicago 
health, aging, and marital status transitions and health outcomes 
social relations study. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B: 
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 63, 375–384. 
doi:10.1093/geronb/ 63.6.S375 

Hayslip Jr., B., Henderson, C. E., & Shore, R. J. (2003). The Structure 
of Grandparental Role Meaning. Journal of Adult Development, 
10(1), 1-13. 

Hedlund, J., Antonakis, J., & Sternberg, R. J. (2002). Tacit knowledge 
and practical intelligence: Understanding the lessons of experience. 
Retrieved from http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/army/
ari_tacit_knowledge.pdf 

Herman-Stabl, M. A., Stemmler, M., & Petersen, A. C. (1995). 
Approach and avoidant coping: Implications for adolescent 
mental health. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 24, 649–665. 

Hetherington, E. M. & Kelly, J. (2002). For better or worse: Divorce 
reconsidered. New York, NY: Norton. 

Holland, K. (2014). Why America’s campuses are going gray. CNBC. 
Retrieved from http://www.cnbc.com/2014/08/28/why- 
americas-campuses-are-going-gray.html 

Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B., & Layton, J. B. (2010). Social 
relationships and mortality risk: a meta-analytic review. PLoS 
Medicine, 7(7), e1000316. 

Hooker, E., & Pressman, S. (2016). The healthy life. NOBA. Retrieved 
from http://nobaproject.com/modules/the-healthy-life 

Horn, J. L., Donaldson, G., & Engstrom, R. (1981). Apprehension, 
memory, and fluid intelligence decline in adulthood. Research on 
Aging, 3(1), 33-84. 

House, J. S., Landis, K. R., & Umberson, D. (1988). Social relationships 
and health. Science, 241, 540–545 

Hu, G., Qiao, Q., Tuomilehto, J., Balkau, B., Borch, Johnsen, K., & 
Pyorala, K. (2004). Prevalence of metabolic syndrome and its 
relation to all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in non-diabetic 


European men and women. Archives of Internal Medicine, 164(10),
1066-1076. 

Huang, J. (2007). Hormones and female sexuality. In M. Tepper & 
A. F. Owens (Eds.), Sexual Health, Vol 2: Physical Foundations (pp. 
43-78). Westport, CT: Praeger. 

Humes, L. E., Kewley-Port, D., Fogerty, D., & Kinney, D. (2010). 
Measures of hearing threshold and temporal processing across 
the adult lifespan. Hearing Research, 264(1/2), 30-40. doi:10.1016/
j.heares.2009.09.010 

International Labour Organization. (2011). Global Employment 
Trends: 2011. Retrieved from http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/
groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/@publ/documents/
publication/wcms_150440.pdf 

Iribarren, C., Sidney, S., Bild, D. E., Liu, K., Markovitz, J. H., Roseman, 
J. M., & Matthews, K. (2000). Association of hostility with coronary 
artery calcification in young adults. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 283, 2546–2551. 

Jackson, G. R. & Owsley, C. (2000). Scotopic sensitivity during 
adulthood. Vision Research, 40 (18), 2467-2473. doi:10.1016/
S0042-6989(00)00108-5 

Jones, J. M. (2013). In U.S., 40% Get Less than Recommended Amount 
of Sleep. Gallup. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/
166553/less-recommended- amount 
sleep.aspx?g_source=sleep%202013&g_medium=search&g_campaign=tiles 

Kagawa-Singer, M., Wu, K., & Kawanishi, Y. (2002). Comparison of 
the menopause and midlife transition between Japanese 
American and European American women. Medical Anthropology 
Quarterly, 16(1), 64-91. 

Kang, S. W., & Marks, N. F. (2014). Parental caregiving for a child 
with special needs, marital strain, and physical health: Evidence 
from National Survey of Midlife in the U.S. 2005. Contemporary 
Perspectives in Family Research, 8A, 183- 209. 

Karakelides, H., & Nair, K. S. (2005). Sarcopenia of aging and its 


metabolic impact. Current Topics in Developmental Biology, 68, 
123-148. 

Kasper, T. (2015). Why you only need 7 hours of sleep. American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine. Retrieved from 
http://sleepeducation.org/news/2015/06/03/why-you-only-
need-7-hours-of-sleep 

Kaufman, B. E., & Hotchkiss, J. L. 2003. The economics of labor 
markets (6th ed.). Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western. 

Kaufman, S. B., & Gregoire, C. (2016). How to cultivate creativity.
Scientific American Mind, 27(1), 62-67. 

Kaur, S., Walia, I., & Singh, A. (2004). How menopause affects the 
lives of women in suburban Chandigarh, India. Climacteric, 7(2), 
175-180. 

Knowles, M. S., Holton, E. F., & Swanson, R. A. (1998). The adult 
learner: A neglected species. Houston: Gulf Pub., Book Division. 

Kochanek, K. D., Murphy, S. L., Xu, J., & Arias, E. (2019). Deaths: Final 
data for 2017. National Vital Statistics Reports, 68(9), 1-77. 

Kouzis, A. C., & Eaton, W. W. (1998). Absence of social networks, 
social support, and health services utilization. Psychological 
Medicine, 28, 1301–1310. doi:10.1017/S0033291798007454 

Krause, N. A., Herzog, R., & Baker, E. (1992). Providing support to 
others and well-being in later life. Journal of Gerontology: 
Psychological Sciences, 47, P300-311. 

Kühnel, J., & Sonnentag, S. (2011). How long do you benefit from 
vacation? A closer look at the fade-out vacation effects. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 32, 125-143. 

Kushida, C. (2005). Sleep deprivation: basic science, physiology, and 
behavior. London, England: Informal Healthcare. 

Lachman, M. E. (2004). Development in midlife. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 55(1), 305-331. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.psych.55.090902.141521 

Landsford, J. E., Antonucci, T.C., Akiyama, H., & Takahashi, K. (2005). 
A quantitative and qualitative approach to social relationships and 


well-being in the United States and Japan. Journal of Comparative 
Family Studies, 36, 1-22. 

Leach, M. S., & Braithwaite, D. O. (1996). A binding tie: Supportive 
communication of family kinkeepers. Journal of Applied 
Communication Research, 24, 200–216. 

Lee, B., Lawson, K. M., Chang, P., Neuendorf, C., Dmitrieva, N. O., 
& Ameida, D. H. (2015). Leisure-time physical activity moderates 
the longitudinal associations between work-family spillover and 
physical health. Journal of Leisure Research, 47(4), 444-466. 

Levinson, D. J. (1978). The seasons of a man’s life. New York: Knopf. 

Livingston, G. (2014). Four in ten couples are saying I do again. In 
Chapter 3. The differing demographic profiles of first-time marries, 
remarried and divorced adults. Pew Research Center. Retrieved 
from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/11/14/
chapter-3-the-differing-demographic-profiles-of-first-time-
married- remarried-and-divorced-adults/ 

Madden, S., St Pierre-Hansen, N., & Kelly L. (2010). First Nations 
women’s knowledge of menopause: Experiences and perspectives. 
Canadian Family Physician, 56(9), e331-e337. 

Malik, S. (2004). Impact of the metabolic syndrome on mortality 
from coronary heart disease, cardiovascular disease, and all 
causes in United States adults. Circulation, 110(10), 1245-1250. 

Malone, J. C., Liu, S. R., Vaillant, G. E., Rentz, D. M., & Waldinger, R. J. 
(2016). Midlife Eriksonian psychosocial development: Setting the 
stage for late-life cognitive and emotional health. Developmental 
Psychology, 52(3), 496-508. 

Marketing Charts Staff. (2014). Are young people watching less TV?
Retrieved from http://www.marketingcharts.com/television/
are-young-people-watching-less-tv-24817/ 

Martin, L. J. (2014). Aging changes in hair and nails. U.S. National 
Library of Medicine. Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/ency/article/004005.htm 

Matthews, K. A., Glass, D. C., Rosenman, R. H., & Bortner, R. W. 
(1977). Competitive drive, pattern A, and coronary heart disease: 


A further analysis of some data from the Western Collaborative 
Group Study. Journal of Chronic Diseases, 30, 489–498. 

Mayo Clinic. (2014a). Heart disease. Retrieved from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/heart- 
disease/basics/definition/con-20034056 

Mayo Clinic. (2014b). Metabolism and weight loss: How you burn 
calories. Retrieved from http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy- 
lifestyle/weight-loss/in-depth/metabolism/art-20046508 

McKenna, K. A. (2008) MySpace or your place: Relationship initiation 
and development in the wired and wireless world. In S. Sprecher, 
A. Wenzel, & J. Harvey (Eds.), Handbook of relationship initiation(pp. 235–247). New York, NY: Psychology Press. 

McKenna, K. A., Green, A. S., & Gleason, M. E. J. (2002). Relationship 
formation on the Internet: What’s the big attraction? Journal of 
Social Issues, 58, 9–31. 

Metlife. (2011). Metlife study of caregiving costs to working caregivers: 
Double jeopardy for baby boomers caring for their parents.
Retrieved from http://www.caregiving.org/wp-content/
uploads/2011/06/mmi-caregiving-costs-working- 
caregivers.pdf 

Maillard, P., Sashardi, S., Beiser, A., Himail, J. J., Au, R., Fletcher, E., 
…. DeCarli, C. (2012). Effects of systolic blood pressure on white-
matter integrity in young adults in the Farmington Heart Study: A 
cross-sectional study. The Lancet: Neurology, 11(12), 1039-1047. 

Miller, T. Q., Smith, T. W., Turner, C. W., Guijarro, M. L., & Hallet, A. J. 
(1996). Meta-analytic review of research on hostility and physical 
health. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 322–348. 

Mitchell, B. A., & Lovegreen, L. D. (2009). The empty nest syndrome 
in midlife families: A multimethod exploration of parental gender 
differences and cultural dynamics. Journal of Family Issues, 30,1651–1670. 

Montenegro, X. P. (2003). Lifestyles, dating, and romance: A study of 
midlife singles. Washington, DC: AARP. 

Monthly Labor Review. (2013). Percentage of the non-


institutionalized civilian workforce employed by gender & age.
Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/cps_aa2013.htm 

Moravec, C. S. (2008). Biofeedback therapy in cardiovascular 
disease: rationale and research overview. Cleveland Clinic Journal 
of Medicine, 75, S35–S38. 

Morita, Y., Iwamoto, I., Mizuma, W., Kuwahata, T., Matsuo, T., 
Yoshinaga, M., &Douchi, T. (2006). Precedence of the shift of 
body-fat distribution over the change in body composition after 
menopause. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 32, 513-516. 

Morley, J. E., Baumgartner, R. N., Roubenoff, R., Mayer, J., & Nair, K. 
S. (2001). Sarcopenia. Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine, 
137(4), 231-243. 

Moskowitz, R. J. (2014). Wrinkles. U. S. National Library of Medicine. 
Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/
article/003252.htm 

Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). The concept of flow. In 
C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology(pp. 89-105). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Nassir, F., Rector, S., Hammoud, G.M., & Ibdah, J.A. (2015). 
Pathogenesis and prevention of hepatic steatosis. 
Gastroenterology & Hepatology, 11(3), 167-175. 

National Alliance for Caregiving. (2015). Caregiving in the U.S. 2015. 
Retrieved from http://www.caregiving.org/caregiving2015. 

National Eye Institute. (2009). Facts about floaters. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/floaters/floaters 

National Eye Institute. (2013). Facts about dry eye. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/dryeye/dryeye 

National Eye Institute. (2015). Facts about diabetic eye disease. 
Retrieved from: https://nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic/retinopathy 

National Eye Institute. (2016). Facts about presbyopia. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/errors/presbyopia 


National Institutes of Health. (2007). Menopause: MedlinePlus 
Medical Encyclopedia. Retrieved from http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/ency/article/000894.htm 

National Institutes of Health. (2013). Gallstones. U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services. Retrieved from 
http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/
digestive-diseases/gallstones/Pages/facts.aspx 

National Institutes of Health. (2014a). The A1C and diabetes. Retrieved 
from http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health- information/health-
topics/diagnostic-tests/a1c-test-diabetes/Pages/index.aspx 

National Institutes of Health (2014b). Age changes in the lungs.
Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/
article/004011.htm 

National Institutes of Health (2014c). Sweet stuff: How sugars and 
sweeteners affect your health. Retrieved from 
https://newsinhealth.nih.gov/issue/oct2014/feature1 

National Institutes of Health. (2014d). What is atherosclerosis? 
Retrieved from http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health- topics/
topics/atherosclerosis 

National Institutes of Health. (2015). Cancer. Retrieved from 
https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/understanding/what-
is-cancer 

National Institutes of Health. (2016a). Facts about diabetes. Retrieved 
from http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health- 
topics/Diabetes/diabetes-facts/Pages/default.aspx 

National Institutes of Health (2016b). Handout on Health: Rheumatoid 
Arthritis. Retrieved from http://www.niams.nih.gov/
health%5Finfo/rheumatic%5Fdisease/ 

National Institutes of Health. (2016c). Older drivers: How health 
affects driving. Retrieved from http://nihseniorhealth.gov/
olderdrivers/howhealthaffectsdriving/01.html 

National Sleep Foundation. (2015). 2015 Sleep in America™ poll finds 
pain a significant challenge when it comes to Americans’ sleep. 
National Sleep Foundation. Retrieved from 


https://sleepfoundation.org/media-center/press-release/
2015-sleep- america-poll 

National Sleep Foundation. (2016). Menopause and Insomnia. 
National Sleep Foundation. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/ask-the-expert/menopause-and-
insomnia 

Neidleman, M. T., Wambacq, I., Besing, J., Spitzer, J. B., & Koehnke, 
J. (2015). The Effect of Background Babble on Working Memory in 
Young and Middle-Aged Adults. Journal of the American Academy 
of Audiology, 26(3), 220-228. doi:10.3766/jaaa.26.3.3 

Neugarten, B. L. (1968). The awareness of middle aging. In B. L. 
Neugarten (Ed.), Middle age and aging (pp. 93-98). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Neugarten, B. L., & Weinstein, K. K. (1964). The changing American 
grandparent. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 26, 199–204. 

Newton, T., Buckley, A., Zurlage, M., Mitchell, C., Shaw, A., & 
Woodruff-Borden, J. (2008). Lack of a close confidant: Prevalence 
and correlates in a medically underserved primary care sample. 
Psychology, Health & Medicine, 13, 185– 192. doi:10.1080/ 
13548500701405491 

Nimrod, G., Kleiber, D. A., & Berdychevesky, L. (2012). Leisure in 
coping with depression. Journal of Leisure Research, 44(4), 414-449. 

Norman, G. (2005). Research in clinical reasoning: Past history and 
current trends. Medical Education, 39, 418–427. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-2929.2005.02127.x 

North American Menopause Society. (2016). Menopause FAQs: 
Understanding the symptoms. Retrieved from 
Http://www.menopause.org/for-women/expert-answers-to-
frequently-asked-questions-about-menopause/menopause- 
faqs-understanding-the-symptoms 

Nwankwo T., Yoon S. S., Burt, V., & Gu, Q. (2013) Hypertension among 
adults in the US: National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey, 2011-2012. NCHS Data Brief, No. 133. Hyattsville, MD: 


National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, US Dept of Health and Human Services. 

Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2008). The 
physical activity guidelines for Americans. Retrieved from 
http://health.gov/
paguidelines/?_ga=1.177233189.1671103883.1467228401 

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). 
Average annual hours actually worked per worker. OECD Stat. 
Retrieved from http://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?DataSetCode=ANHRS 

Palacios, S., Henderson V. W., & Siseles, N. (2010). Age of menopause 
and impact of climacteric symptoms by geographical region. 
Climacteric, 13(5), 419-428. 

Parker, K. & Patten, E. (2013). The sandwich generation: Rising 
financial burdens for middle-aged Americans. Pew Research 
Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/
01/30/the-sandwich-generation/ 

Patel, C., Marmot, M. G., & Terry, D. J. (1981). Controlled trial of 
biofeedback-aided behavioural methods in reducing mild 
hypertension. British Medical Journal (Clinical research ed.), 282, 
2005–2008. 

Pattison, K. (2015). Sleep deficit. Experience Life. Retrieved from 
https://experiencelife.com/article/sleep-deficit/ 

Payne, K. K. (2015). The remarriage rate: Geographic variation, 2013. 
National Center for Family & Marriage Research. Retrieved from 
http://bgsu.edu/ncfmr/resources/data/family-profiles/payne-
remarriage-rate-fp-15-08.html 

Peterson, B. E. & Duncan, L. E. (2007). Midlife women’s generativity 
and authoritarianism: Marriage, motherhood, and 10 years of 
aging. Psychology and Aging, 22(3), 411-419. 

Peterson, B. E., Smirles, K. A., & Wentworth, P. A. (1997). Generativity 
and authoritarianism: Implications for personality, political 
involvement, and parenting. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 72, 1202-1216. 

Pew Research Center. (2010). The return of the multi-generational 


family household. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/03/18/the-return-of-
the-multi-generational-family-household/ 

Pew Research Center. (2010a). How the great recession has changed 
life in America. Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/
2010/06/30/how-the-great-recession-has-changed-life-in-
america/ 

Pew Research Center. (2010b). Section 5: Generations and the great 
recession. Retrieved from http://www.people- press.org/2011/
11/03/section-5-generations-and-the-great-recession/ 

Pew Research Center. (2015). Caring for aging parents. Family 
support in graying societies. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/05/21/4-caring-for-
aging-parents/ 

Pew Research Center. (2016). The Gender gap in religion around the 
world. Retrieved from http://www.pewforum.org/2016/03/22/
the-gender-gap-in-religion-around-the-world/ 

Phillips, M. L. (2011). The mind at midlife. American Psychological 
Association. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/monitor/2011/
04/mind-midlife.aspx 

Proctor, D. N., Balagopal, P., & Nair, K. S. (1998). Age-related 
sarcopenia in humans is associated with reduced synthetic rates 
of specific muscle proteins. Journal of Nutrition, 128(2 Suppl.), 
351S-355S. 

Project Time-Off (2016). The state of American vacation: How 
vacation became a casualty of our work culture. Retrieved from 
http://www.projecttimeoff.com/research/state-american-
vacation-2016 

Qian, X., Yarnal, C. M., Almeida, D. M. (2013). Does leisure time as a 
stress coping source increase affective complexity? Applying the 
Dynamic Model of Affect (DMA). Journal of Leisure Research, 45(3), 
393-414. 

Ray, R., Sanes, M., & Schmitt, J. (2013). No-vacation nation revisited. 


Center for Economic Policy Research. Retrieved from 
http://cepr.net/publications/reports/no-vacation-nation-2013 

Ray, R., & Schmitt, J. (2007). No vacation nation USA – A comparison 
of leave and holiday in OECD countries. Retrieved from 
http://www.law.harvard.edu/programs/lwp/papers/
No_Holidays.pdf 

Research Network on Successful Midlife Development. (2007, 
February 7). Midlife Research – MIDMAC WebSite. Retrieved from 
http://midmac.med.harvard.edu/research.html 

Riordan, C. M., & Griffeth, R. W. (1995). The opportunity for 
friendship in the workplace: An underexplored construct. Journal 
of Business and Psychology, 10, 141–154. 

Rossi, A. S. (2004). The menopausal transition and aging process. 
In How healthy are we: A national study of health in midlife. (pp. 
550-575). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Rubin, M., Scevak, J., Southgate, E., Macqueen, S., Williams, P., & 
Douglas, H. (2018). Older women, deeper learning, and greater 
satisfaction at university: Age and gender predict university 
students’ learning approach and degree satisfaction. Diversity in 
Higher Education, 11(1), 82-96. 

Saad, L. (2014). The 40 hour work week is actually longer – by 
7 hours. Gallop. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/
175286/hour-workweek-actually-longer-seven-hours.aspx 

Salmon, P. (2001). Effects of physical exercise on anxiety, depression, 
and sensitivity to stress: A unifying theory. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 21(1), 33–61. 

Salthouse, T. A. (2004). What and when of cognitive aging. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 140–144. Sandgerg-Thoma, 
S. E., Synder, A. R., & Jang, B. J. (2015). Exiting and returning to 
the parental home for boomerang kids. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 77, 806-818. doi:10.1111/jomf.12183 

Sawatzky, R., Ratner, P. A., & Chiu, L. (2005). A meta-analysis of 
the relationship between spirituality and quality of life. Social 
Indicators Research, 72, 153-188. 


Schaie, K. W. (2005). Developmental influences on adult intelligence 
the Seattle longitudinal study. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Scheibe, S., Kunzmann, U. & Baltes, P. B. (2009). New territories 
of Positive Lifespan Development: Wisdom and Life Longings. In 
C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Oxford handbook of Positive 
Psychology (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Schick, V., Herbenick, D., Reece, M., Sanders, S., A., Dodge, B., 
Middlestadt, S. E., & Fortenberry, J. D. (2010). Sexual behaviors, 
condom use, and sexual health of Americans over 50: Implications 
for sexual health promotion for older adults. Journal of Sexual 
Medicine, 7(Suppl. 5), 315-329. 

Schuler, P., Vinci, D., Isosaari, R., Philipp, S., Todorovich, J., Roy, J., & 
Evans, R. (2008). Body-shape perceptions and body mass index of 
older African American and European American women. Journal 
of Cross-Cultural Gerontology, 23(3), 255-264. 

Schulz, R., Newsom, J., Mittelmark, M., Burton, L., Hirsch, C., & 
Jackson, S. (1997). Health effects of caregiving: The caregiver 
health effects study. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 19, 110-116. 

Seccombe, K., & Warner, R. L. (2004). Marriages and families: 
Relationships in social context. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/
Thomson Learning. 

Seltzer, M. M., Floyd, F., Song, J., Greenberg, J., & Hong, J. (2011). 
Midlife and aging parents of adults with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities: Impacts of lifelong parenting. 
American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disability, 
116, 479-499. 

Selye, H. (1946). The general adaptation syndrome and the diseases 
of adaptation. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology, 6, 117– 230. 

Shure, J., & Cahan, V. (1998, September 10). Launch an exercise 
program today, say Aging Institute, Senator John Glenn. National 
Institute on Aging. Retrieved from http://www.nia.nih.gov/
NewsAndEvents/PressReleases/PR19980910Launch.htm 

Slevin, K. F. (2010). “If I had lots of money…I’d have a body makeover”: 
Managing the aging body. Social Forces, 88(3), 1003-1020. 

Sorensen, P., & Cooper, N. J. (2010). Reshaping the family man: A 


grounded theory study of the meaning of grandfatherhood. 
Journal of Men’s Studies, 18(2), 117-136. doi:10.3149/jms.1802.117 

Spiegel, D., Kraemer, H., Bloom, J., & Gottheil, E. (1989). Effect of 
psychosocial treatment on survival of patients with metastatic 
breast cancer. The Lancet, 334, 888–891. 

Stern, C., & Konno, R. (2009). Physical Leisure activities and their 
role in preventing dementia: A systematic review. International 
Journal of Evidence-Based Healthcare, 7, 270-282. 

Stewart, S. D., Manning, W. D., & Smock, P. J. (2003). Union formation 
among men in the US: Does having prior children matter? Journal 
of Marriage and Family, 65, 90 – 104. 

Su, D., Wu, X., Zhang, Y., Li, H., Zhang, J., & Zhou, L. (2012). 
Depression and social support between China’ rural and urban 
empty-nest elderly. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 55,564–569. 

Swierzewski, S. J. (2015). Erectile Dysfunction. Retrieved from 
http://www.healthcommunities.com/erectile- dysfunction/
overview-of-impotence.shtml 

Tangri, S., Thomas, V., & Mednick, M. (2003). Prediction of 
satisfaction among college-educated African American women. 
Journal of Adult Development, 10, 113-125. 

Taylor, B. J., Matthews, K. A., Hasler, B. P., Roecklein, K. A., Kline, C. 
E., Buysse, D. J., Kravitz, H. M., Tiani, A. G., Harlow, S. D., & Hall, 
M. H. (2016). Bedtime variability and metabolic health in midlife 
women: the SWAN Sleep Study. SLEEP, 39(2), 457–465. 

Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, 
R. A., & Updegraff, J. A. (2000). Biobehavioral responses to stress 
in females: Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-flight. Psychological 
Review, 107, 411–429. 

Teachman, J. (2008). Complex life course patterns and the risk of 
divorce in second marriages. Journal of Marriage and Family, 70, 
294 – 305. 

Teuscher, U., & Teuscher, C. (2006). Reconsidering the double 
standard of aging: Effects of gender and sexual orientation on 


facial attractiveness ratings. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 42(4), 631-639. 

Thurston, W. E, & Vissandjée, B. (2005). An ecological model for 
understanding culture as a determinant of women’s health. 
Critical Public Health, 15(3), 229-242. 

Torti, F. M., Gwyther, L. P., Reed, S. D., Friedman, J. Y., & Schulman, 
K. A. (2004). A multinational review of recent trends and reports 
in dementia caregiver burden. Alzheimer Disease and Associated 
Disorders, 18(2), 99-109. 

Tower, R. B., & Kasl, S. V. (1995). Depressive symptoms across older 
spouses and the moderating effect of marital closeness. 
Psychology and Aging, 10, 625– 638. doi:10.1037/0882-7974.10.4.625 

Twisk, J. W., Snel, J., Kemper, H. C., & van Mechelen, W. (1999). 
Changes in daily hassles and life events and the relationship with 
coronary heart disease risk factors: A 2-year longitudinal study 
in 27–29-year-old males and females. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, 46, 229–240. 

Uchida, Y., Nakashima, T., Ando, F., Niino, N., & Shimokata, H. (2003). 
Prevalence of self-perceived auditory problems and their relation 
to audiometric thresholds in a middle-aged to elderly population. 
Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 123(5), 618. 

Umberson, D., Williams, K., Powers, D., Chen, M., & Campbell, A. 
(2005). As good as it gets? A life course perspective on marital 
quality. Social Forces, 81, 493-511. 

United Health Foundation. (2016). New report finds significant health 
concerns loom for seniors in coming years. Retrieved from 
http://www.unitedhealthfoundation.org/News/Articles/Feeds/
2016/052516AHRSeniorReport.aspx?r=3 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016). American time use survey 
– 2015. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/
atus.pdf 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. (2015) 2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans. 8th Edition. Retrieved from http://health.gov/
dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/ 


U.S. Department of Labor (2016). Vacation Leave. Retrieved from 
https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/workhours/vacation_leave 

U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2012). Unemployed older 
workers: Many experience challenges regaining employment and 
face reduced retirement security. Retrieved from 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-445 

Vaillant, G. E. (1977). Adaptation of life. Boston, MA: Little, Brown 

Vaillant, G. E. (2008). Spiritual evolution: A scientific defense of faith. 
New York: Doubleday Broadway. Vaillant, G. E. (2012). Triumphs of 
experience. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Waldrop, D., Weber, J., Herald, S., Pruett, J., Cooper, K., & 
Juozapavicius, K. (1999). Wisdom and life experience: How 
grandfathers mentor their grandchildren. Journal of Aging and 
Identity, 4 (1), 33-46. 

Wang, W. & Parker, K. (2014) Record share of Americans have never 
married: As values, economics and gender patterns change. 
Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/09/24/
record-share-of-americans-have-never-married/ 

WebMD. (2016). Erectile Dysfunction: Testosterone Replacement 
Therapy. Retrieved from http://www.webmd.com/erectile- 
dysfunction/guide/testosterone-replacement-
therapy?page=2#3 

Willis, S. L., & Schaie, K. W. (1999). Intellectual functioning in midlife. 
In S. L. Willis & J. D. Reid (Eds.), Life in the Middle: Psychological 
and Social Development in Middle Age (pp. 233-247). San Diego: 
Academic. 

Wong, Y. C., & Leung, J. (2012). Long-term care in China: Issues and 
prospects. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 55, 570–586. 

World Health Organization. (2018). Top 10 causes of death. Retrieved 
from https://www.who.int/gho/mortality_burden_disease/
causes_death/top_10/en/ 

World Health Organization. (2019). Burn-out an “occupational 
phenomenon”: International Classification of Diseases. Retrieved 
from: https://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/burn-
out/en/ 


Wu, Z., Sun, L., Sun, Y., Zhang, X., Tao, F., & Cui, G. (2010). Correlation 
between loneliness and social relationship among empty nest 
elderly in Anhui rural area, China. Aging and Mental Health, 14,108–112. 

Yeager, C. A., Hyer, L. A., Hobbs, B., & Coyne, A. C., (2010). Alzheimer’s 
disease and vascular dementia: The complex relationship between 
diagnosis and caregiver burden. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 
31(6), 376-384. 

Yick-Flanagan, A. (2013). Meanings of menopause: Cultural 
considerations. Retrieved from http://www.netce.com/
coursecontent.php?courseid=976 

Zuidema, S. U., de Jonghe, J. F., Verhey, F. R., & Koopman, R. T. 
(2009). Predictors of neuropsychiatric symptoms in nursing home 
patients: Influence of gender and dementia severity. International 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 24(10), 1079-1086. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 8 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 27: Psychosocial 
Development in Middle 
Adulthood 

Chapter 27 Learning Objectives 

Explain the controversy surrounding the concept of 
a midlife crisis 
Explain the sources of stress confronting adults in 
midlife and the strategies to cope 
Summarize Erikson’s seventh psychosocial task of 
generativity vs. stagnation 
Describe the relationships middle-aged adults have 
with their children, parents, and other family 
members 
Describe singlehood, marriage, divorce, and 
remarriage at midlife 
Describe the contemporary roles of grandparents 
Describe friendships at midlife 
Explain how women are uniquely affected at midlife 
Describe friendships at midlife 
Explain how women are uniquely affected at midlife 
Explain the role of religion at midlife 



There are many socioemotional changes that occur in how middle-
aged adults perceive themselves. While people in their early 20s 
may emphasize how old they are to gain respect or to be viewed 
as experienced, by the time people reach their 40s they tend to 
emphasize how young they are. For instance, a few 40-year-olds 
cut each other down for being so young stating: “You’re only 43? 
I’m 48!” A previous focus on the future gives way to an emphasis on 
the present. Neugarten (1968) notes that in midlife, people no longer 
think of their lives in terms of how long they have lived. Rather, life 
is thought of in terms of how many years are left. 

Midlife Crisis? 

In 1978 Daniel Levinson published a book entitled The Seasons of 
a Man’s Life in which he presented a theory of development in 
adulthood. Levinson’s work was based on in-depth interviews with 
40 men between the ages of 35-45. Levinson (1978) indicated that 
adults go through stages and have an image of the future that 
motivates them. This image is called “the dream” and for the men 
interviewed, it was a dream of how their career paths would 
progress and where they would be at midlife. According to Levinson 
the midlife transition (40-45) was a time of reevaluating previous 
commitments; making dramatic changes if necessary; giving 
expression to previously ignored talents or aspirations, and feeling 
more of a sense of urgency about life and its meaning. By the time 
the men entered middle adulthood (45-50), they believed they 
committed to the new choices made and placed one’s energies into 
these commitments. 

Levinson believed that a midlife crisis was a normal part of 
development as the person is more aware of how much time has 
gone by and how much time is left. The future focus of early 
adulthood gives way to an emphasis on the present in midlife, and 


the men interviewed had difficulty reconciling the “dream” they 
held about the future with the reality they experienced. 
Consequently, they felt impatient and were no longer willing to 
postpone the things they had always wanted to do. Although 
Levinson believed his research demonstrated the existence of a 
midlife crisis, his study has been criticized for his research methods, 
including small sample size, similar ages, and concerns about a 
cohort effect. In fact, other research does not support his theory of 
the midlife crisis. 

Vaillant (2012) believed that it was the cross-sectional design of 
Levinson’s study that led to the erroneous conclusion of an 
inevitable midlife crisis. Instead, he believed that longitudinal 
studies of an individual’s entire life were needed to determine the 
factors associated with optimum health and potential. Vaillant was 
one of the main researchers in the 75-year-old Harvard Study of 
Adult Development, and he considered a midlife crisis to be a rare 
occurrence among the participants (Vaillant, 1977). Additional 
findings of this longitudinal study will be discussed in the next 
chapter in late adulthood. 

Most research suggests that most people in the United States 
today do not experience a midlife crisis. Results of a 10-year study 
conducted by the MacArthur Foundation Research Network on 
Successful Midlife Development, based on telephone interviews 
with over 3,000 midlife adults, suggest that the years between 40 
and 60 are ones marked by a sense of well-being. Only 23% of 
the participants reported experiencing a midlife crisis. The crisis 
tended to occur among the highly educated and was triggered by a 
major life event rather than out of fear of aging (Research Network 
on Successful Midlife Development, 2007). 


Stress 

We all know that stress plays a major role in our mental and physical 
health, but what exactly is stress? The term stress is defined as a 
pattern of physical and psychological responses in an organism after 
it perceives a threatening event that disturbs its homeostasis and 
taxes its abilities to cope with the event (Hooker & Pressman, 2016). 
Stress was originally derived from the field of mechanics where it 
is used to describe materials under pressure. The word was first 
used in a psychological manner by researcher Hans Selye, who was 
examining the effect of an ovarian hormone that he thought caused 
sickness in a sample of rats. Surprisingly, he noticed that almost any 
injected hormone produced this same sickness. He smartly realized 
that it was not the hormone under investigation that was causing 
these problems, but instead, the aversive experience of being 
handled and injected by researchers led to high physiological 
arousal, and eventually to health problems like ulcers. Selye (1946) 
coined the term stressor to label a stimulus that had this effect 
on the body (that is, causing stress). He developed a model of the 
stress response called the General Adaptation Syndrome, which 
is a three-phase model of stress, which includes a mobilization of 


physiological resources phase, a coping phase, and an exhaustion 
phase (i.e., when an organism fails to cope with the stress adequately 
and depletes its resources). Figure 8.25 illustrates the General 
Adaptation Syndrome. 

Psychologists have studied stress in a myriad of ways, and it is not 
just a major life stressor (e.g., a family death, a natural disaster) 
that increases the likelihood of getting sick. Stress can result from 
negative events, chronically difficult situations, a biological fight-
or-flight response, and as clinical illness, such as post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD). Even small daily hassles, like getting stuck in 
traffic or fighting with your friend, can raise your blood pressure, 
alter your stress hormones, and even suppress your immune system 
function (DeLongis, Folkman, & Lazarus, 1988; Twisk, Snel, Kemper, 
& van Machelen, 1999). Stress continues to be one of the most 


important and well-studied psychological correlates of illness 
because excessive stress causes potentially damaging wear and tear 
on the body and can influence almost any disease process. 

Dispositions and Stress: Negative dispositions and personality 
traits have been strongly tied to an array of health risks. One of 
the earliest negative trait-to-health connections was discovered in 
the 1950s by two cardiologists. They made the interesting discovery 
that there were common behavioral and psychological patterns 
among their heart patients that were not present in other patient 
samples. This pattern included being competitive, impatient, hostile, 
and time urgent. They labeled it Type A Behavior. Importantly, it 
was found to be associated with double the risk of heart disease 
as compared with Type B Behavior (absence of Type A behaviors)
(Friedman & Rosenman, 1959). Since the 1950s, researchers have 
discovered that it is the hostility and competitiveness components 
of Type A that are especially harmful to heart health (Iribarren et 
al., 2000; Matthews, Glass, Rosenman, & Bortner, 1977; Miller, Smith, 
Turner, Guijarro, & Hallet, 1996). Hostile individuals are quick to get 
upset, and this angry arousal can damage the arteries of the heart. 
In addition, given their negative personality style, hostile people 
often lack a heath-protective supportive social network. 

Social Relationships and Stress: Research has shown that the 
impact of social isolation on our risk for disease and death is similar 
in magnitude to the risk associated with smoking regularly (Holt-
Lunstad, Smith, & Layton, 2010; House, Landis, & Umberson, 1988). 
In fact, the importance of social relationships for our health is so 
significant that some scientists believe our body has developed a 
physiological system that encourages us to seek out our 
relationships, especially in times of stress (Taylor et al., 2000). Social 
integration is the concept used to describe the number of social roles 
that you have (Cohen & Willis, 1985). For example, you might be a 
daughter, a basketball team member, a Humane Society volunteer, 
a coworker, and a student. Maintaining these different roles can 
improve your health via encouragement from those around you to 


maintain a healthy lifestyle. Those in your social network might also 
provide you with social support (e.g., when you are under stress). 
This support might include emotional help (e.g., a hug when you 
need it), tangible help (e.g., lending you money), or advice. By 
helping to improve health behaviors and reduce stress, social 
relationships can have a powerful, protective impact on health, and 
in some cases, might even help people with serious illnesses stay 
alive longer (Spiegel, Kraemer, Bloom, & Gottheil, 1989). 

Caregiving and Stress: A disabled child, spouse, parent, or other 
family member is part of the lives of some midlife adults. According 
to the National Alliance for Caregiving (2015), 40 million Americans 
provide unpaid caregiving. The typical caregiver is a 49-year-old 
female currently caring for a 69-year-old female who needs care 
because of a long-term physical condition. Looking more closely at 
the age of the recipient of caregiving, the typical caregiver for those 
18-49 years of age is a female (61%) caring mostly for her own child 
(32%) followed by a spouse or partner (17%). When looking at older 


recipients (50+) who receive care, the typical caregiver is female 
(60%) caring for a parent (47%) or spouse (10%). 

Caregiving places enormous stress on the caregiver. Caregiving 
for a young or adult child with special needs was associated with 
poorer global health and more physical symptoms among both 
fathers and mothers (Seltzer, Floyd, Song, Greenberg, & Hong, 2011). 
Marital relationships are also a factor in how caring affects stress 
and chronic conditions. Fathers who were caregivers identified 
more chronic health conditions than non-caregiving fathers, 
regardless of marital quality. In contrast, caregiving mothers 
reported higher levels of chronic conditions when they reported a 
high level of marital strain (Kang & Marks, 2014). Age can also make 
a difference in how one is affected by the stress of caring for a 
child with special needs. Using data from the Study of Midlife in 
the United States, Ha, Hong, Seltzer, and Greenberg (2008) found 
that older parents were significantly less likely to experience the 
negative effects of having a disabled child than younger parents. 
They concluded that an age-related weakening of the stress 
occurred over time. This follows with the greater emotional stability 
noted at midlife. 

Currently, 25% of adult children, mainly baby boomers, provide 
personal or financial care to a parent (Metlife, 2011). Daughters are 
more likely to provide basic care and sons are more likely to provide 
financial assistance. Adult children 50+ who work and provide care 
to a parent are more likely to have fair or poor health when 
compared to those who do not provide care. Some adult children 
choose to leave the workforce, however, the cost of leaving the 
workforce early to care for a parent is high. For females, lost wages 
and social security benefits equal $324,044, while for men it equals 
$283,716 (Metlife, 2011). This loss can jeopardize the adult child’s 
financial future. Consequently, there is a need for greater workplace 
flexibility for working caregivers. 

Spousal Care: Certainly, caring for a disabled spouse would be 
a difficult experience that could negatively affect one’s health. 


However, research indicates that there can be a positive health 
effect on caring for a disabled spouse. Beach, Schulz, Yee, and 
Jackson (2000) evaluated health-related outcomes in four groups: 
Spouses with no caregiving needed (Group 1), living with a disabled 
spouse but not providing care (Group 2), living with a disabled 
spouse and providing care (Group 3), and helping a disabled spouse 
while reporting caregiver strain, including elevated levels of 
emotional and physical stress (Group 4). Not surprisingly, the 
participants in Group 4 were the least healthy and identified poorer 
perceived health, an increase in health-risk behaviors, and an 
increase in anxiety and depression symptoms. However, those in 
Group 3 who provided care for a spouse, but did not identify 
caregiver strain, actually identified decreased levels of anxiety and 
depression compared to Group 2 and were actually similar to those 
in Group 1. It appears that greater caregiving involvement was 
related to better mental health as long as the caregiving spouse 
did not feel the strain. The beneficial effects of helping identified 
by the participants were consistent with previous research (Krause, 
Herzog, & Baker, 1992; Schulz et al., 1997). 

When caring for a disabled spouse, gender differences have also 
been identified. Female caregivers of a spouse with dementia 
experienced more burden, had poorer mental and physical health, 
exhibited increased depressive symptomatology, took part in fewer 
health-promoting activities, and received fewer hours of help than 
male caregivers (Gibbons et al., 2014). This study was consistent 
with previous research findings that women experience more 
caregiving burden than men, despite similar caregiving situations 
(Torti, Gwyther, Reed, Friedman, & Schulman, 2004; Yeager, Hyer, 
Hobbs, & Coyne, 2010). Explanations for why women do not use 
more external support, which may alleviate some of the burdens, 
include women’s expectations that they should assume caregiving 
roles (Torti et al, 2004) and their concerns with the opinions of 
others (Arai, Sugiura, Miura, Washio, & Kudo, 2000). Also 
contributing to women’s poorer caregiving outcomes is that 
disabled males are more aggressive than females, especially males 


with dementia who display more physical and sexual aggression 
toward their caregivers (Eastley & Wilcock, 1997; Zuidema, de 
Jonghe, Verhey, & Koopmans, 2009). Female caregivers are certainly 
at risk for negative consequences of caregiving, and greater support 
needs to be available to them. 

Stress Management: On a scale from 1 to 10, those Americans aged 
39-52 rated their stress at 5.3, and those aged 53-71 rated their 
stress at 3.9 (American Psychological Association, 2017). The most 
common sources of stress included the future of our nation, money, 
work, current political climate, and violence and crime. Given that 
these sources of our stress are often difficult to change, a number 
of interventions have been designed to help reduce the aversive 
responses to duress, especially related to health. For example, 
relaxation activities and forms of meditation are techniques that 
allow individuals to reduce their stress via breathing exercises, 
muscle relaxation, and mental imagery. Physiological arousal from 
stress can also be reduced via biofeedback, a technique where the 
individual is shown bodily information that is not normally available 
to them (e.g., heart rate), and then taught strategies to alter this signal.
This type of intervention has even shown promise in reducing heart 
and hypertension risk, as well as other serious conditions (Moravec, 
2008; Patel, Marmot, & Terry, 1981). Reducing stress does not have 


to be complicated. For example, exercise is a great stress reduction 
activity (Salmon, 2001) that has a myriad of health benefits. 

Coping Strategies: Coping is often classified into two categories: 
Problem-focused coping or emotion-focused coping (Carver, 
Scheier, & Weintraub, 1989). Problem-focused coping is thought of 
as actively addressing the event that is causing stress in an effort 
to solve the issue at hand. For example, say you have an important 
exam coming up next week. A problem-focused strategy might be 
to spend additional time over the weekend studying to make sure 
you understand all of the material. Emotion-focused coping, on 
the other hand, regulates the emotions that come with stress. In 
the above examination example, this might mean watching a funny 
movie to take your mind off the anxiety you are feeling. In the 
short term, emotion-focused coping might reduce feelings of stress, 
but problem-focused coping seems to have the greatest impact on 
mental wellness (Billings & Moos, 1981; Herman-Stabl, Stemmler, & 
Petersen, 1995). That being said, when events are uncontrollable 
(e.g., the death of a loved one), emotion-focused coping directed 
at managing your feelings, at first, might be the better strategy. 
Therefore, it is always important to consider the match of the 
stressor to the coping strategy when evaluating its plausible 
benefits. 


Erikson: Generativity vs Stagnation 

According to Erikson (1950, 1982) generativity encompasses 
procreativity, productivity, and creativity. This stage includes the 
generation of new beings, new products, and new ideas, as well 
as self-generation concerned with further identity development. 
Erikson believed that the stage of generativity, during which one 
established a family and career, was the longest of all the stages. 
Individuals at midlife are primarily concerned with leaving a positive 
legacy of themselves, and parenthood is the primary generative 
type. Erikson understood that work and family relationships may be 
in conflict due to the obligations and responsibilities of each, but he 
believed it was overall a positive developmental time. In addition to 
being parents and working, Erikson also described individuals being 
involved in the community during this stage. A sense of stagnation 
occurs when one is not active in generative matters, however, 
stagnation can motive a person to redirect energies into more 
meaningful activities. 

Erikson identified “virtues” for each of his eight stages, and the 
virtue emerging when one achieves generativity is “Care”. Erikson 
believed that those in middle adulthood should “take care of the 
persons, the products, and the ideas one has learned to care for” 
(Erikson, 1982, p. 67). Further, Erikson believed that the strengths 
gained from the six earlier stages are essential for the generational 
task of cultivating strength in the next generation. Erikson further 
argued that generativity occurred best after the individual had 
resolved issues of identity and intimacy (Peterson & Duncan, 2007). 

Research has demonstrated that generative adults possess many 
positive characteristics, including good cultural knowledge and 
healthy adaptation to the world (Peterson & Duncan, 2007). Using 
the Big 5 personality traits, generative women and men scored high 
on conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, openness to 
experience, and low on neuroticism (de St. Aubin & McAdams, 1995; 
Peterson, Smirles, & Wentworth, 1997). Additionally, women scoring 


high in generativity at age 52, were rated high in positive personality 
characteristics, satisfaction with marriage and motherhood, and 
successful aging at age 62 (Peterson & Duncan, 2007). Similarly, men 
rated higher in generativity at midlife were associated with stronger 
global cognitive functioning (e.g., memory, attention, calculation), 
stronger executive functioning (e.g., response inhibition, abstract 
thinking, cognitive flexibility), and lower levels of depression in late 
adulthood (Malone, Liu, Vaillant, Rentz, & Waldinger, 2016). 

Erikson (1982) indicated that at the end of this demanding stage, 
individuals may withdraw as generativity is no longer expected in 
late adulthood. This releases elders from the task of caretaking or 
working. However, not feeling needed or challenged may result in 
stagnation, and consequently one should not fully withdraw from 
generative tasks as they enter Erikson’s last stage in late adulthood. 

Midlife Relationships 

The sandwich generation refers to adults who have at least one 
parent age 65 or older and are either raising their own children or 
providing support for their grown children. According to a recent 


Pew Research survey, 47% of middle-aged adults are part of this 
sandwich generation (Parker & Patten, 2013). In addition, 15% of 
middle-aged adults are providing financial support to an older 
parent while raising or supporting their own children (see Figure 
8.30). According to the same survey, almost half (48%) of middle-
aged adults, have supported their adult children in the past year, 
and 27% are the primary source of support for their grown children. 

Seventy-one percent of the sandwich generation is age 40-59, 19% 
were younger than 40, and 10% were 60 or older. Hispanics are 
more likely to find themselves supporting two generations; 31% 
have parents 65 or older and a dependent child, compared with 24% 
of whites and 21% of blacks (Parker & Patten, 2013). Women are more 
likely to take on the role of care provider for older parents in the U.S. 
and Germany (Pew Research, 2015). About 20% of women say they 
have helped with personal care, such as getting dressed or bathing, 
of aging parents in the past year, compared with 8% of men in the 


U.S. and 4% in Germany. In contrast, in Italy men are just as likely 
(25%) as women (26%) to have provided personal care. 

The Pew survey found that almost 33% of the sandwich-
generation adults were more likely to say they always feel rushed, 
while only 23% of other adults said this. However, the survey 
suggests that those who were supporting both parents and children 
reported being just as happy as those middle-aged adults who did 
not find themselves in the sandwich generation (Parker & Patten, 
2013). Adults who are supporting both parents and children did 
report greater financial strain (see Figure 8.31). Only 28% reported 
that they were living comfortably versus 41% of those who were not 
also supporting their parents. Almost 33% were just making ends 
meet, compared with 17% of those who did not have the additional 
financial burden of aging parents. 


Kinkeeping: At midlife adults may find themselves as kinkeeper. 
In all families, there is a person or persons who keep the family 
connected and who promote solidarity and continuity in the family(Brown & DeRycke, 2010). Who in your own family do you count 
on to organize family gatherings? Who knows the history of your 
family? Who do people turn to in your family for advice and 
support? Who works to strengthen the bonds between members of 
your family? 

These are your family’s kin keepers, and they are usually women 
(Leach & Braithwaite, 1996; Brown & DeRycke, 2010). Leach and 
Braithwaite found that 86% of their respondents named a woman 


as their family’s kinkeeper, and Brown and DeRycke found that 
mothers, maternal grandmothers, and paternal grandmothers were 
more likely to be a family’s kinkeeper than were fathers, young 
adult children, and grandfathers combined. Brown and DeRycke also 
found that among young adults, women were more likely to be a 
kinkeeper than were young adult men. 

Kinkeeping can be a source of distress when it interferes with 
other obligations (Gerstel & Gallagher, 1993). Gerstel and Gallagher 
found that on average, kin keepers provide almost a full week of 
work each month to kinkeeping (almost 34 hours). They also found 
that the more activities the kinkeeper took on, and the more kin 
they helped the more stress and higher the levels of depression 
a kinkeeper experienced. However, unlike other studies on 
kinkeeping, Gerstel and Gallagher also included a number of 
activities that would be considered more “caregiving,” such as 
providing transportation, making repairs, providing meals, etc. in 
addition to the usual activities of kinkeeping. 

Empty nest: The empty nest 
or post-parental period refers to 
the time period when children are grown up and have left home(Dennerstein, Dudley & Guthrie, 2002). For most parents, this 
occurs during midlife. This time is recognized as a “normative event” 
as parents are aware that their children will become adults and 
eventually leave home (Mitchell & Lovegreen, 2009). The empty nest 
creates complex emotions, both positive and negative, for many 
parents. Some theorists suggest this is a time of role loss for 
parents, others suggest it is one of role strain relief (Bouchard, 2013). 

The role loss hypothesis predicts that when people lose an 
important role in their life they experience a decrease in emotional 
well-being. It is from this perspective that the concept of the empty 
nest syndrome emerged, which refers to great emotional distress 
experienced by parents, typically mothers, after children have left 
home. The empty nest syndrome is linked to the absence of 
alternative roles for the parent in which they could establish their 
identity (Borland, 1982). In Bouchard’s (2013) review of the research, 


she found that few parents reported loneliness or a big sense of loss 
once all their children had left home. 

In contrast, the role stress relief hypothesis suggests that the 
empty nest period should lead to more positive changes for parents, 
as the responsibility of raising children has been lifted. The role 
strain relief hypothesis was supported by many studies in 
Bouchard’s (2013) review. A consistent finding throughout the 
research literature is that raising children has a negative impact 
on the quality of marital relationships (Ahlborg, Misvaer, & Möller, 
2009; Bouchard, 2013). Most studies have reported that marital 
satisfaction often increases during the launching phase of the 
empty nest period and that this satisfaction endures long after the 
last child has left home (Gorchoff, John, & Helson, 2008). 

However, most of the research on the post-parental period has 
been with American parents. A number of studies in China suggest 
that empty-nesters, especially in more rural areas of China, report 
greater loneliness and depression than their counterparts with 
children still at home (Wu et al., 2010). Family support for the elderly 
by their children is a cherished Chinese tradition (Wong & Leung, 
2012). With children moving from the rural communities to the 
larger cities for education and employment this may explain the 
more pessimistic reaction of Chinese parents than in American 
samples. The loss of an adult child in a rural region may mean a loss 
of family income for aging parents. Empty-nesters in urban regions 
of China did not report the same degree of distress (Su et al., 2012), 
suggesting that it not so much the event of children leaving, but the 
additional hardships this may place on aging parents. 

Boomerang Kids: As you read in Chapter 7, young adults are living 
with their parents for a longer duration and in greater numbers than 
previous generations. In addition to those in early adulthood who 
are not leaving the home of their parents, there are also young adults 
who are returning after having lived independently outside the home, 
and these are called boomerang kids. Figure 8.32 shows the number 
of American young people 25-35 who were living at home based 


on their generation (Fry, 2017). Figure 8.33 shows that more young 
adults 18-34 in Europe are also living with their parents (Desilver, 
2016). Many of the same financial reasons that are influencing young 
people’s decisions to delay exit from the home of their parents are 
underlying their decisions to return home. In addition, to financial 
reasons, some boomerang kids are returning because of emotional 
distress, such as mental health issues (Sandberg-Thoma, Snyder, & 
Jang, 2015). 


What is the effect on parents when their adult children return 


home? Certainly, there is considerable research that shows that the 
stress of raising children can have a negative impact on parents’ 
well-being and that when children leave home many couples 
experience less stress and greater life satisfaction (see the section 
on the empty nest). Early research in the 1980s and 1990s supported 
the notion that boomerang children, along with those who were 
failing to exit the home, placed greater financial hardship on the 
parents, and the parents reported more negative perceptions of 
this living arrangement (Aquilino, 1991). Recent surveys suggest that 
today’s parents are more tolerant of this, perhaps because this is 
becoming a more normative experience than in the past. Moreover, 
children who return are more likely to have had good relationships 
with their parents growing up, so there may be less stress between 
parents and their adult children who return (Sandberg-Thoma et al., 
2015). Parents of young adults who have moved back home because 
of economic reasons report that they are just as satisfied with their 
life as are parents whose adult children are still living independently 
(Parker, 2012). Parker found that adult children age 25 and older 
are more likely to contribute financially to the family or complete 
chores and other household duties. Parker also found that living in 
a multigenerational household may be acting as an economic safety 
net for young adults. In comparison to young adults who were living 
outside of the home, those living with their parents were less likely 
to be living in poverty (17% versus 10%). 

So far, we have considered the impact that adult children who have 
returned home or have yet to leave the nest have on the lives of 
middle-aged parents. What about the effect on parents who have 
adult children dealing with personal problems, such as alcoholism, 
chronic health concerns, mental health issues, trouble with the law, 
poor social relationships, or academic or job-related problems, even 
if they are not living at home? The life course perspective proposes 
the idea of linked lives (Greenfield & Marks, 2006). The notion that 
people in important relationships, such as children and parents, 
mutually influence each other’s developmental pathways. In previous 


chapters, you have read about the effects that parents have on their 
children’s development, but this relationship is bidirectional. The 
problems faced by children, even when those children are adults, 
influence the lives of their parents. Greenfield and Marks found in 
their study of middle-aged parents and their adult children, those 
parents whose children were dealing with personal problems 
reported more negative affect, lower self-acceptance, poorer 
parent-child interactions, and more family relationship stress. The 
more problems the adult children were facing, the worse the lives 
and emotional health of their parents, with single parents faring the 
worst. 


Middle Adult Lifestyles 

Singlehood: According to a Pew Research study, 16 per 1,000 adults 
age 45 to 54 and 7 per 1000 age 55 and over have never married in 


through divorce or widowhood. DePaulo (2014) has challenged the 
idea that singles, especially the always single, fair worse emotionally 
the U. S. (Wang & Parker, 2014). However, some of them may be living 
with a partner. In addition, some singles at midlife may be single 
and in health when compared to those married. DePaulo suggests 
there is a bias in how studies examine the benefits of marriage. Most 
studies focus on comparisons between married versus not married, 
which do not include a separate comparison between those always 
single, and those who are single because of divorce or widowhood. 
Her research has found that those who are married may be more 
satisfied with life than the divorced or widowed, but there is little 
difference between married and always single, especially when 
comparing those who are recently married with those who have 
been married for four or more years. It appears that once the initial 
blush of the honeymoon wears off, those who are wedded are no 
happier or healthier than those who remained single. This might 
also suggest that there may be problems with how the “married” 
category is also seen as one homogeneous group. 

Online Dating: Montenegro (2003) surveyed over 3,000 singles 
aged 40–69, and almost half of the participants reported their most 
important reason for dating was to have someone to talk to or do 
things with. Additionally, sexual fulfillment was also identified as an 
important goal for many. Alterovitz & Mendelsohn (2013) reviewed 
online personal ads for men and women over age 40 and found that 
romantic activities and sexual interests were mentioned at similar 
rates among the middle-age and young-old age groups, but less for 
the old-old age group. 

Marriage: As you read in Chapter 7, there has been a number 
of changes in the marriage rate as more people are cohabitating, 
more are deciding to stay single, and more are getting married at 
a later age. As you can see in Figure 8.34, 48% of adults age 45-54 
are married; either in their first marriage (22%) or have remarried 
(26%). This makes marriage the most common relationship status 
for middle-aged adults in the United States. Marital satisfaction 


tends to increase for many couples in midlife as children are leaving 
home (Landsford, Antonucci, Akiyama, & Takahashi, 2005). Not all 
researchers agree. They suggest that those who are unhappy with 
their marriage are likely to have gotten divorced by now, making 
the quality of marriages later in life only look more satisfactory 
(Umberson, Williams, Powers, Chen, & Campbell, 2005). 

Divorce: Livingston (2014) found that 27% of adults age 45 to 54 
were divorced (see Figure 8.32). Additionally, 57% of divorced adults 
were women. This reflects the fact that men are more likely to 
remarry than are women. Two-thirds of divorces are initiated by 
women (AARP, 2009). Most divorces take place within the first 5 to 
10 years of marriage. This timeline reflects people’s initial attempts 
to salvage the relationship. After a few years of limited success, the 
couple may decide to end the marriage. It used to be that divorce 
after having been married for 20 or more years was rare, but in 


especially as most of their children have grown. Finally, given 
increases in human longevity, the prospect of living several more 
years or decades with an incompatible spouse may prompt middle-
aged and older adults to leave the marriage. 
recent years the divorce rate among more long-term marriages has 
been increasing. Brown and Lin (2013) note that while the divorce 
rate in the U.S. has declined since the 1990s, the rate among those 
50 and older has doubled. They suggest several reasons for the 
“graying of divorce”. There is less stigma attached to divorce today 
than in the past. Some older women are out-earning their spouses, 
and thus may be more financially capable of supporting themselves, 

Gottman and Levenson (2000) found that the divorces in early 
adulthood were angrier and conflictual, with each partner blaming 
the other for the failures in the marriage. In contrast, they found 
that at midlife divorces tended to be more about having grown 
apart or cooling off of the relationship. A survey by AARP (2009) 
found that men and women had diverse motivations for getting a 
divorce. Women reported concerns about the verbal and physical 
abusiveness of their partner (23%), drug/alcohol abuse (18%), and 
infidelity (17%). In contrast, men mentioned they had simply fallen 
out of love (17%), no longer shared interests or values (14%), and 
infidelity (14%). Both genders felt their marriage had been over long 
before the decision to divorce was made, with many of the middle-
aged adults in the survey reporting that they stayed together 
because they were still raising children. Females also indicated that 
they remained in their marriage due to financial concerns, including 
the loss of health care (Sohn, 2015). However, only 1 in 4 adults 
regretted their decision to divorce. 

The effects of divorce are varied. Overall, young adults struggle 
more with the consequences of divorce than do those at midlife, 
as they have a higher risk of depression or other signs of problems 
with psychological adjustment (Birditt & Antonucci, 2013). Divorce 
at midlife is more stressful for women. In the AARP (2009) survey, 
44% of middle-aged women mentioned financial problems after 


divorcing their spouse, in comparison only 11% of men reported 
such difficulties. However, a number of women who divorce in 
midlife report that they felt a great release from their day-to-day 
sense of unhappiness. Hetherington and Kelly (2002) found that 
among the divorce enhancers, those who had used the experience 
to better themselves and seek more productive intimate relationships, 
and the competent loners, those who used their divorce experience 
to grow emotionally, but who choose to stay single, the overwhelming 
majority were women. 

Dating Post-Divorce: Most divorced adults have dated by one 
year after filing for divorce (Anderson et al., 2004; Anderson & 
Greene, 2011). One in four recent filers report having been in or were 
currently in a serious relationship, and over half were in a serious 
relationship by one year after filing for divorce. Not surprisingly, 
younger adults were more likely to be dating than were middle-aged 
or older adults, no doubt due to the larger pool of potential partners 
from which they could to draw. Of course, these relationships will 
not all end in marriage. Teachman (2008) found that more than 
two-thirds of women under the age of 45 had cohabited with a 
partnership between their first and second marriages. 

Dating for adults with children can be more of a challenge. 
Courtships are shorter in remarriage than in first marriages. When 
couples are “dating”, there is less going out and more time spent 
in activities at home or with the children. So the couple gets less 
time together to focus on their relationship. Anxiety or memories of 
past relationships can also get in the way. 
As one Talmudic scholar 
suggests “when a divorced man marries a divorced woman, four go 
to bed.” (Secombe & Warner, 2004). 

Post-divorce parents gatekeep, that is, they regulate the flow of 
information about their new romantic partner to their children, in an 
attempt to balance their own needs for romance with consideration 
regarding the needs and reactions of their children. Anderson et 
al. (2004) found that almost half (47%) of dating parents gradually 
introduce their children to their dating partner, giving both their 
romantic partner and children time to adjust and get to know each 


other. Many parents who use this approach do so to avoid their 
children having to keep meeting someone new until it becomes 
clearer that this relationship might be more than casual. It might 
also help if the adult relationship is on the firmer ground so it can 
weather any initial push back from children when it is revealed. 
Forty percent are open and transparent about the new relationship 
at the outset with their children. Thirteen percent do not reveal 
the relationship until it is clear that cohabitation and or remarriage 
is likely. Anderson and colleagues suggest that practical matters 
influence which gatekeeping method parents may use. Parents may 
be able to successfully shield their children from a parade of suitors 
if there is reliable childcare available. The age and temperament of 
the child, along with concerns about the reaction of the ex-spouse, 
may also influence when parents reveal their romantic relationships 
to their children. 

Rates of remarriage: The rate for remarriage, like the rate for 
marriage, has been declining overall. In 2013 the remarriage rate was 
approximately 28 per 1,000 adults 18 and older. This represents a 
44% decline since 1990 and a 16% decline since 2008 (Payne, 2015). 
Brown and Lin (2013) found that the rate of remarriage dropped 
more for younger adults than middle-aged and older adults, and 
Livingston (2014) found that as we age we are more likely to have 
remarried (see Figure 8.35). This is not surprising as it takes some 
time to marry, divorce, and then find someone else to marry. 
However, Livingston found that unlike those younger than 55, those 
55 and up are remarrying at a higher rate than in the past. In 2013, 
67% of adults 55-64 and 50% of adults 65 and older had remarried, 
up from 55% and 34% in 1960, respectively. 


Men have a higher rate of remarriage at every age group starting 
at age 25 (Payne, 2015). Livingston (2014) reported that in 2013, 
64% of divorced or widowed men compared with 52% of divorced 
or widowed women had remarried. However, this gender gap has 
narrowed over time. Even though more men still remarry, they are 
remarrying at a slower rate. In contrast, women are remarrying 
today more than they did in 1980. This gender gap has closed mostly 
among young and middle-aged adults but still persists among those 
65 and older. 

In 2012, Whites who were previously married were more likely to 


remarry than were other racial and ethnic groups (Livingston, 2014). 
Moreover, the rate of remarriage has increased among Whites, 
while the rate of remarriage has declined for other racial and ethnic 
groups. This increase is driven by White women, whose rate of 
remarriage has increased, while the rate for White males has 
declined. 

Success of Remarriage: Reviews are mixed as to the happiness 
and success of remarriages. While some remarriages are more 
successful, especially if the divorce motivated the adult to engage 
in self-improvement and personal growth (Hetherington & Kelly, 
2002), a number of divorced adults end up in very similar marriages 
the second or third time around (Hetherington & Kelly, 2002). 
Remarriages have challenges that are not found in first marriages 
that may create additional stress in the marital relationship. There 
can often be a general lack of clarity in family roles and expectations 
when trying to incorporate new kin into the family structure, even 
determining the appropriate terms for this kin, along with their 
roles can be a challenge. 

Partners may have to navigate carefully their role when dealing 
with their partners’ children. All of this may lead to greater 
dissatisfaction and even resentment among family members. Even 
though remarried couples tend to have more realistic expectations 
for marriage, they tend to be less willing to stay in unhappy 
situations. The rate of divorce among remarriages is higher than 
among first marriages (Payne, 2015), which can add additional 
burdens, especially when children are involved. 

Children’s Influence on Repartnering: Does having children 
affect whether a parent remarries? Goldscheider and Sassler (2006) 
found children residing with their mothers reduces the mothers’ 
likelihood of marriage, only with respect to marrying a man without 
children. Further, having children in the home appears to increase 
single men’s likelihood of marrying a woman with children (Stewart, 
Manning, & Smock, 2003). There is also some evidence that 
individuals who participated in a stepfamily while growing up may 


feel better prepared for stepfamily living as adults. Goldscheider 
and Kaufman (2006) found that having experienced family divorce 
as a child is associated with a greater willingness to marry a partner 
with children. 

When children are present after divorce, one of the challenges 
the adults encounter is how much influence the child will have 
when selecting a new partner. Greene, Anderson, Hetherington, 
Forgatch, and DeGarmo (2003) identified two types of parents. The 
child-focused parent allows the child’s views, reactions, and needs 
to influence the partnering. In contrast, the adult-focused parent 
expects that their child can adapt and should accommodate to 
parental wishes. Anderson and Greene (2011) found that divorced 
custodial mothers identified as more adult-focused tended to be 
older, more educated, employed, and more likely to have been 
married longer. Additionally, adult-focused mothers reported 
having less rapport with their children, spent less time in joint 
activities with their children, and the child reported lower rapport 
with their mothers. Lastly, when the child and partner were 
resisting one another, adult-focused mothers responded more to 
the concerns of the partner, while the child-focused mothers 
responded more to the concerns of the child. Understanding the 


implications of these two different perspectives can assist parents 
in their attempts to partner. 

Grandparents 

In addition to maintaining relationships with their children and 
aging parents, many people in middle adulthood take on yet another 
role, becoming a grandparent. The role of grandparents varies 
around the world. In multigenerational households, grandparents 
may play a greater role in the day-to-day activities of their 
grandchildren. 
While this family dynamic is more common in Latin 
America, Asia, and Africa, it has been on the increase in the U.S. (Pew 
Research Center, 2010). 

The degree of grandparent involvement also depends on the 
proximity of the grandparents’ home to their grandchildren. In 
developed nations, the greater mobility of society can mean that 
grandparents may live long distances from their grandchildren. 
Technology has brought grandparents and their more distant 
grandchildren together. Sorenson and Cooper (2010) found that 
many of the grandfathers they interviewed would text, email, or 
Skype with their grandchildren in order to stay in touch. 


Cherlin and Furstenberg (1986) described three styles of 
grandparents. Thirty percent of grandparents were remote as they 
rarely saw their grandchildren. Usually, they lived far away from 
their grandchildren but may also have had a distant relationship. 
Contact was typically made on special occasions, such as holidays 
or birthdays. Fifty-five percent of grandparents were described as 
companionate as they did things with their grandchildren but had 
little authority or control over them. They preferred to spend time 
with them without interfering in parenting. They were more like 
friends to their grandchildren. Fifteen percent of grandparents were 
described as involved as they took a very active role in their 
grandchild’s life. The involved grandparent had frequent contact 
with and authority over the grandchild, and their grandchildren 
might even have lived with them. Grandmothers, more so than 
grandfathers, played this role. In contrast, more grandfathers than 
grandmothers saw their role as a family historian and family advisor 
(Neugarten and Weinstein, 1964). 

Bengtson (2001) suggests that grandparents adopt different styles 
with different grandchildren, and over time may change styles as 
circumstances in the family change. Today more grandparents are 
the sole care providers for grandchildren or may step in at times 
of crisis. With these changes, grandparents are redefining how they 
see their role in the family with fewer adopting a more formal role 
(Hayslip, Henderson & Shore, 2003). 

Early research on grandparents has routinely focused on 
grandmothers, with grandfathers often becoming invisible members 
of the family (Sorensen & Cooper, 2010). Yet, grandfathers stress 
the importance of their relationships with their grandchildren as 
strongly as do grandmothers (Waldrop et al., 1999). For some men, 
this may provide them with the opportunity to engage in activities 
that their occupations, as well as their generation’s views of 
fatherhood and masculinity, kept them from engaging in with their 
own children (Sorenson & Cooper, 2010). 

Many of the grandfathers in Sorenson and Cooper’s study felt 
that being a grandfather was easier and a lot more enjoyable. Even 


among grandfathers that took on a more involved role, there was 
still a greater sense that they could be more light-hearted and 
flexible in their interactions with their grandchildren. Many 
grandfathers reported that they were more openly affectionate with 
their grandchildren than they had been with their own children. 

Friendships 

Adults of all ages who reported having a confidante or close friend 
with whom they could share personal feelings and concerns 
believed these friends contributed to a sense of belonging, security, 
and overall wellbeing (Dunér & Nordstrom, 2007). Having a close 
friend is a factor in significantly lower odds of psychiatric morbidity 
including depression and anxiety (Harrison, Barrow, Gask, & Creed, 
1999; Newton et al., 2008). The availability of a close friend has also 
been shown to lessen the adverse effects of stress on health (Kouzis 
& Eaton, 1998; Hawkley et al., 2008; Tower & Kasl, 1995). Additionally, 
poor social connectedness in adulthood is associated with a larger 
risk of premature mortality than cigarette smoking, obesity, and 
excessive alcohol use (Holt-Lunstad, Smith, & Layton, 2010). 


Female friendships and social support networks at midlife 
contribute significantly to a woman’s feeling of life satisfaction and 
well-being (Borzumato-Gainey, Kennedy, McCabe, & Degges-White, 
2009). Degges-White and Myers (2006) found that women who have 
supportive people in their life experience greater life satisfaction 
than do those who live a more solitary life. A friendship network 
or the presence of a confidant have both been identified for their 
importance to women’s mental health (Baruch & Brooks-Gunn, 
1984). Unfortunately, with numerous caretaking responsibilities at 
home, it may be difficult for women to find time and energy to 
enhance the friendships that provide an increased sense of life 
satisfaction (Borzumato-Gainey et al., 2009). Emslie, Hunt, and 
Lyons (2013) found that for men in midlife, the shared consumption 
of alcohol was important to creating and maintaining male friends. 
Drinking with friends was justified as a way for men to talk to each 
other, provide social support, relax, and improve mood. Although 
the social support provided when men drink together can be 
helpful, the role of alcohol in male friendships can lead to health-
damaging behavior from excessive drinking. 

The importance of social relationships begins in early adulthood 
by laying down a foundation for strong social connectedness and 
facilitating comfort with intimacy (Erikson, 1959). To determine the 
impact of the quantity and quality of social relationships in young 
adulthood on middle adulthood, Carmichael, Reis, and Duberstein 
(2015) assessed individuals at age 50 on measures of social 
connection (types of relationships and friendship quality) and 
psychological outcomes (loneliness, depression, psychological well-
being). Results indicated that the number of social interactions at 
age 20 and the quality, not quantity, of social interaction at age 
30 predicted midlife social interactions. Those individuals who had 
high levels of social information seeking (quantity) at age 20 
followed by less quantity in social relationships but greater 
emotional closeness (quality), resulted in positive psychosocial 
adjustment at midlife. 


Continuing to socialize widely in one’s 30s appeared to negatively 
affect the development of intimacy, and consequently resulted in 
worse psychological outcomes at age 50. 

Internet Friendships: What influence does the Internet have on 
friendships? It is not surprising that people use the Internet with 
the goal of meeting and making new friends (Fehr, 2008; McKenna, 
2008). Researchers have wondered if the issue of not being face-
to-face reduces the authenticity of relationships, or if the Internet 
really allows people to develop deep, meaningful connections. 
Interestingly, research has demonstrated that virtual relationships 
are often as intimate as in-person relationships; in fact, Bargh and 
colleagues found that online relationships are sometimes more 
intimate (Bargh, McKenna, & Fitsimons, 2002). This can be especially 
true for those individuals who are more socially anxious and lonely 
as such individuals are more likely to turn to the Internet to find 
new and meaningful relationships (McKenna, Green, & Gleason, 
2002). McKenna and colleagues suggest that for people who have 
a hard time meeting and maintaining relationships, due to shyness, 
anxiety, or lack of face-to-face social skills, the Internet provides 
a safe, nonthreatening place to develop and maintain relationships. 
Similarly, Benford (2008) found that for high-functioning autistic 
individuals, the Internet facilitated communication and relationship 
development with others, which would have been more difficult 
in face-to-face contexts, leading to the conclusion that Internet 
communication could be empowering for those who feel frustrated 
when communicating face to face. 

Workplace Friendships: Friendships often take root in the 
workplace, due to the fact that people are spending as much, or 
more, time at work than they are with their family and friends 
(Kaufman & Hotchkiss, 2003). Often, it is through these 
relationships that people receive mentoring and obtain social 
support and resources, but they can also experience conflicts and 
the potential for misinterpretation when sexual attraction is an 
issue. Indeed, Elsesser and Peplau (2006) found that many workers 


reported that friendships grew out of collaborative work projects, 
and these friendships made their days more pleasant. 

In addition to those benefits, Riordan and Griffeth (1995) found 
that people who worked in an environment where friendships could 
develop and be maintained were more likely to report higher levels 
of job satisfaction, job involvement, and organizational 
commitment, and they were less likely to leave that job. Similarly, a 
Gallup poll revealed that employees who had close friends at work 
were almost 50% more satisfied with their jobs than those who did 
not (Armour, 2007). 

Women in Midlife 

In Western society, aging for women is much more stressful than 
for men as society emphasizes youthful beauty and attractiveness 
(Slevin, 2010). The description that aging men are viewed as 
“distinguished” and aging women are viewed as “old” is referred 


to as the double standard of aging (Teuscher & Teuscher, 2006). 
Since women have traditionally been valued for their reproductive 
capabilities, they may be considered old once they are 
postmenopausal. In contrast, men have traditionally been valued 
for their achievements, competence, and power, and therefore are 
not considered old until they are physically unable to work (Carroll, 
2016). Consequently, women experience more fear, anxiety, and 
concern about their identity as they age, and may feel pressure to 
prove themselves as productive and valuable members of society 
(Bromberger, Kravitz, & Chang, 2013). 

Attitudes about aging, however, do vary by race, culture, and 
sexual orientation. In some cultures, aging women gain greater 
social status. For example, as Asian women age, they attain greater 
respect and have greater authority in the household (Fung, 2013). 
Compared to white women, Black and Latina’s women possess fewer 
stereotypes about aging (Schuler et al., 2008). Lesbians are also 
more positive about aging and looking older than heterosexual 
women (Slevin, 2010). The impact of media certainly plays a role 
in how women view aging by selling anti-aging products and 
supporting cosmetic surgeries to look younger (Gilleard & Higgs, 
2000). 

Religion and Spirituality 


Grzywacz and Keyes (2004) found that in addition to personal health 
behaviors, such as regular exercise, healthy weight, and not 
smoking, social behaviors, including involvement in religious-
related activities, have been shown to be positively related to 
optimal health. However, it is not only those who are involved in 
a specific religion that benefit, but so too do those identified as 
being spiritual. According to Greenfield, Vaillant, and Marks (2009)
religiosity refers to engaging with a formal religious group’s 
doctrines, values, traditions, and co-members. In contrast,


spirituality refers to an individual’s intrapsychic sense of connection 
with something transcendent (that which exists apart from and not 
limited by the material universe) and the subsequent feelings of awe, 
gratitude, compassion, and forgiveness. Research has demonstrated 
a strong relationship between spirituality and psychological well-
being, irrespective of an individual’s religious participation (Vaillant, 
2008). Additionally, Sawatzky, Ratner, & Chiu (2005) found that 
spirituality was related to a higher quality of life for both individuals 
and societies. 

Based on reports from the 2005 National Survey of Midlife in the 
United States, Greenfield et al. (2009) found that higher levels of 
spirituality were associated with lower levels of negative affect and 
higher levels of positive affect, personal growth, purpose in life, 
positive relationships with others, self-acceptance, environmental 
mastery, and autonomy. In contrast, formal religious participation 
was only associated with higher levels of purpose in life and 
personal growth among just older adults and lower levels of 
autonomy. In summary, it appears that formal religious participation 


and spirituality relate differently to an individual’s overall 
psychological well-being. 

Age: Older individuals identify religion/spirituality as being more 
important in their lives than those younger (Beit-Hallahmi & Argyle, 
1998). This age difference has been explained by several factors 
including that religion and spirituality assist older individuals in 
coping with age-related losses, provide opportunities for 
socialization and social support in later life, and demonstrate a 
cohort effect in that older individuals were socialized more to be 
religious and spiritual than those younger (Greenfield et al., 2009). 

Gender: In the United States, women report identifying as being 
more religious and spiritual than men do (de Vaus & McAllister, 
1987). According to the Pew Research Center (2016), women in the 
United States are more likely to say religion is very important in 
their lives than men (60% vs. 47%). American women also are more 
likely than American men to say they pray daily (64% vs. 47%) and 
attend religious services at least once a week (40% vs. 32%). 
Theories to explain this gender difference include that women may 
benefit more from the social-relational aspects of religion/
spirituality because social relationships more strongly influence 
women’s mental health. Additionally, women have been socialized 
to internalize the behaviors linked with religious values, such as 
cooperation and nurturance, more than males (Greenfield et al., 
2009). 

Worldwide: To measure the religious beliefs and practices of men 
and women around the world, the Pew Research Center (2016) 
conducted surveys of the general population in 84 countries 
between 2008 and 2015. Overall, an estimated 83% of women 
worldwide identified with religion compared with 80% of men. This 
equaled 97 million more women than men identifying with a 
religion. There were no countries in which men were more religious 
than women by 2 percentage points or more. Among Christians, 
women reported higher rates of weekly church attendance and 
higher rates of daily prayer. In contrast, Muslim women and Muslim 
men showed similar levels of religiousness, except the frequency of 


attendance at worship services. Because of religious norms, Muslim 
men worshiped at a mosque more often than Muslim women. 
Similarly, Jewish men attended a synagogue more often than Jewish 
women. In Orthodox Judaism, communal worship services cannot 
take place unless a minyan, or quorum of at least 10 Jewish men, is 
present, thus ensuring that men will have high rates of attendance. 
Only in Israel, where roughly 22% of all Jewish adults self-identify 
as Orthodox, did a higher percentage of men than women report 
engaging in daily prayer. 

References 

AARP. (2009). The divorce experience: A study of divorce at midlife 
and beyond. Washington, DC: AARP 

Ahlborg, T., Misvaer, N., & Möller, A. (2009). Perception of marital 
quality by parents with small children: A follow-up study when the 
firstborn is 4 years old. Journal of Family Nursing, 15, 237–263. 

Alterovitz, S. S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2013). Relationship goals of 
middle-aged, young-old, and old-old Internet daters: An analysis 
of online personal ads. Journal of Aging Studies, 27, 159–165. 
doi.10.1016/j.jaging.2012.12.006 

American Association of Community Colleges (2016). Plus 50 


community colleges: Ageless learning. Retrieved from 
http://plus50.aacc.nche.edu/Pages/Default.aspx 

American Cancer Society. (2019). Cancer Facts and Figures 2019.
Retrieved from https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer- 
org/research/cancer-facts-and-statistics/annual-cancer-facts-
and-figures/2019/cancer-facts-and-figures-2019.pdf 

American Diabetes Association (2016). Standards of medical care in 
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 39(1), 1-112. 

American Heart Association (2016). Saturated fats. Retrieved from 
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/HealthyLiving/
HealthyEating/Nutrition/Saturated-
Fats_UCM_301110_Article.jsp 

American Psychological Association (2017). Stress in America: The 
state of our nation. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/images/
state-nation_tcm7-225609.pdf 

American Psychological Association (2016). By the numbers: Hearing 
loss and mental health. Monitor on Psychology, 47(4), 9. 

Anderson, E. R., & Greene, S. M. (2011). “My child and I are a package 
deal”: Balancing adult and child concerns in repartnering after 
divorce. Journal of Family Psychology, 25(5), 741-750. 

Anderson, E.R., Greene, S.M., Walker, L., Malerba, C.A., Forgatch, 
M.S., & DeGarmo, D.S. (2004). Ready to take a chance again: 
Transitions into dating among divorced parents. Journal of 
Divorce and Remarriage, 40, 61-75. 

Aquilino, W. (1991). Predicting parents’ experiences with coresidence 
adult children. Journal of Family Issues, 12(3), 323-342. 

Arai, Y., Sugiura, M., Miura, H., Washio, M., & Kudo, K. (2000). Undue 
concern for other’s opinions deters caregivers of impaired elderly 
from using public services in rural Japan. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(10), 961- 968. 

Armour, S. (2007, August 2). Friendships and work: A good or bad 
partnership? USA Today. Retrieved from 
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/workplace/
2007-08-01-work-friends_N.htm 

Avis, N. E., Stellato, R., & Crawford, S. (2001). Is there a menopausal 


syndrome? Menopausal status and symptoms across racial/
ethnic groups. Social Science and Medicine, 52(3), 345-356. 

Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., & Lindenberger, U. (1999). Lifespan 
Psychology: Theory and Application to Intellectual Functioning. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 471-507. 

Bargh, J. A., McKenna, K. Y. A, & Fitsimons, G. G. (2002). Can you 
see the real me? Activation and expression of the true self on the 
Internet. Journal of Social Issues, 58, 33–48. 

Barreto, M., Ryan, M. K., & Schmitt, M. T. (2009). The glass ceiling 
in the 21st century: Understanding the barriers to gender equality. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Baruch, G., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1984). Women in midlife. New York: 
Plenum. 

Beach, S. R., Schulz, R., Yee, J. L., & Jackson, S. (2000). Negative 
and positive health effects of caring for a disabled spouse: 
Longitudinal findings from the caregiver health effects study. 
Psychology and Aging, 15(2), 259-271. 

Beit-Hallahmi, B., & Argyle, M. (1998). Religious behavior, belief, and 
experience. New York: Routledge. 

Bengtson, V. L. (2001). Families, intergenerational relationships, and 
kinkeeping in midlife. In N. M. Putney (Author) & M. E. Lachman 
(Ed.), Handbook of midlife development (pp. 528-579). New York: 
Wiley. 

Berglund, L., Oliver, E. H., Fontanez, N., Holleran, S., Matthews, K., 
Roheim, P. S., & DELTA Investigators. (1999). HDL- subpopulation 
patterns in response to reductions in dietary total and saturated 
fat intakes in healthy subjects. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 70, 992-1000. 

Berkeley Wellness. (2011). The lowdown on low testosterone. 
Retrieved from http://www.berkeleywellness.com/self- care/
sexual-health/article/lowdown-low-testosterone 

Besen, E., Matz-Costa, C., Brown, M., Smyer, M. A., & Pitt-
Catsouphers, M. (2013). Job characteristics, core self-evaluations, 


and job satisfaction. International Journal of Aging & Human 
Development, 76(4), 269-295. 

Billings, A. G., & Moos, R. H. (1981). The role of coping responses and 
social resources in attenuating the stress of life events. Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine, 4, 139–157. 

Birditt, K. S., & Antonucci, T.C. (2012). Till death do us part: Contexts 
and implications of marriage, divorce, and remarriage across 
adulthood. Research in Human Development, 9(2), 103-105. 

Borland, D. C. (1982). A cohort analysis approach to the empty-nest 
syndrome among three ethnic groups of women: A theoretical 
position. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 44, 117–129. 

Borzumato-Gainey, C., Kennedy, A., McCabe, B., & Degges-White, S. 
(2009). Life satisfaction, self-esteem, and subjective age in women 
across the life span. Adultspan Journal, 8(1), 29-42. 

Bouchard, G. (2013). How do parents reaction when their children 
leave home: An integrative review. Journal of Adult Development, 
21, 69-79. 

Bromberger, J. T., Kravitz, H. M., & Chang, Y. (2013). Does risk for 
anxiety increase during the menopausal transition? Study of 
Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN). Menopause, 20(5), 
488-495. 

Brown, L. H., & DeRycke, S. B. (2010). The kinkeeping connection: 
Continuity, crisis and consensus. Journal of Intergenerational 
Relationships, 8(4), 338-353, DOI: 10.1080/15350770.2010.520616 

Brown, S. L., & Lin, I. (2013). The gray divorce revolution: Rising 
divorce among middle aged and older adults 1990-2010. National 
Center for Family & Marriage Research Working Paper Series. 
Bowling Green State University. https://www.bgsu.edu/content/
dam/BGSU/college-of-arts-and- sciences/NCFMR/ 
documents/Lin/The-Gray- Divorce.pdf 

Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). The employment situation-June 
2019. Retrieved from: https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/
empsit.pdf 

Busse, E. W. (1969). Theories of aging. In E. W. Busse & E/. Pfeiffer 


(Eds.), Behavior and adaptation in later life (pp. 11-31). Boston, MA: 
Little Brown. 

Carmichael, C. L., Reis, H. T., & Duberstein, P. R. (2015). In your 20s 
it’s quantity, in your 30s it’s quality: The prognostic value of social 
activity across 30 years of adulthood. Psychology and Aging, 30(1), 
95-105. 

Carroll, J. L. (2016). Sexuality now: Embracing diversity (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. 

Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., & Weintraub, J. K. (1989). Assessing 
coping strategies: A theoretically based approach. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 267–283. 

Center for Sexual Health Promotion. (2010). National survey of 
sexual health and behavior. Retrieved from 
http://www.sexualhealth.indiana.edu 

Centers for Disease Control (2014a). About high blood pressure. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/about.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014b). Behaviors that 
increase the risk for high blood pressure. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/behavior.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014c). Measuring high 
blood pressure. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/
bloodpressure/measure.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014d). National 
diabetes statistics report, 2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/national-
diabetes-report-web.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014e). Diagnoses of 
HIV infection among adults aged 50 years and older in the United 
States and dependent areas 2010–2014. HIV surveillance report, 
21(2), 1-69. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/
reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-supplemental-
report-vol-21-2.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Facts about high 


cholesterol. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/cholesterol/
facts.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). The National 
Center for Health Statistics. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/index.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). National diabetes 
statistics report, 2017. Retrieved from: https://www.cdc.gov/
diabetes/pdfs/data/statistics/national-diabetes-statistics-
report.pdf 

Chang, Y. F., An, Y., Bigel, M., Wong, D. F., Troncoso, J. C., O’Brien, 
R. J., Breitner, J. C., Ferruci, L., Resnick, S. M., & Thanbisetty, 
M. (2016). Midlife adiposity predicts earlier onset of Alzheimer’s 
dementia, neuropathology and presymptomatic cerebral amyloid 
accumulation. Molecular Psychiatry, 21(7), 910-915. 

Charness, N., & Krampe, R. T. (2006). Aging and expertise. In K. 
Ericsson, N. Charness & P. Feltovich (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook 
of expertise and expert performance. Cambridge, United Kingdom: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Cherlin, A. J., & Furstenberg, F. F. (1986). The new American 
grandparent: A place in the family, a life apart. New York: Basic 
Books. 

Cohen, S., & Wills, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, and the 
buffering hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 310–357. 

Crawford, S. & Channon, S. (2002). Dissociation between 
performance on abstract tests of executive function and problem 
solving in real life type situations in normal aging. Aging and 
Mental Health, 6, 12-21. 

Crist, L. A., Champagne, C. M., Corsino, L., Lien, L. F., Zhang, G., 
& Young, D. R. (2012). Influence of change in aerobic fitness and 
weight on prevalence of metabolic syndrome. Preventing Chronic 
Disease 9,110171. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd9.110171 

Crowson, C. S., Matteson, E. L., Myasoedova, E., Michet, C. J., Ernste, 
F. C., Warrington, K. J., …Gabriel, S. E. (2011). The lifetime risk 
of adult-onset rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory 


autoimmune rheumatic diseases. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 63(3), 
633-639. doi: 10.1002/art.30155. 

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal 
experience. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. 

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology of 
discovery and invention. New York: Harper 

Collins. Dawes, P., DicMonrokinson, C., Emsley, R., Bishop, P. N., 
Cruickshanks, K. J., Edmundson-Jones, M., …. Munro, K. (2014). 
Vision impairment and dual sensory problems in middle age. 
Ophthalmic Physiological Optics, 34, 479–488. doi: 10.1111/
opo.12138479 

Degges-White, S., & Myers, J, E. (2006). Women at midlife: An 
exploration of chronological age, subjective age, wellness, and life 
satisfaction, Adultspan Journal, 5, 67-80. 

DeLongis, A., Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1988). The impact of daily 
stress on health and mood: Psychological and social resources 
as mediators. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 
486–495. 

Dennerstein, L., Dudley, E., & Guthrie, J. (2002). Empty nest or 
revolving door? A prospective study of women’s quality of life in 
midlife during the phase of children leaving and re-entering the 
home. Psychological Medicine, 32, 545–550. 

DePaulo, B. (2014). A singles studies perspective on mount marriage. 
Psychological Inquiry, 25(1), 64-68. doi: 10.1080/
1047840X.2014.878173 

Desilver, D. (2016). In the U. S. and abroad, more young adults are 
living with their parents. Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/05/24/in-the-
u-s-and-abroad-more-young-adults-are-living-with-their- 
parents/ 

de St. Aubin, E., & Mc Adams, D. P. (1995). The relation of generative 
concern and generative action to personality traits, satisfaction/
happiness with life and ego development. Journal of Adult 
Development, 2, 99-112. 


De Vaus, D. & McAllister, I. (1987). Gender differences in religion: 
A test of the structural location theory. American Sociological 
Review, 52, 472-481. 

Dew, M. A., Hoch, C. C., Buysse, D. J., Monk, T. H., Begley, A. E., 
Houck, P. R.,…Reynolds, C. F., III. (2003). Healthy older adults’ 
sleep predicts all-cause mortality at 4 to 19 years of follow-up. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 65(1), 63–73. 

Dimah, K., & Dimah, A. (2004). Intimate relationships and sexual 
attitudes of older African American men and women. The 
Gerontologist, 44, 612-613. 

Drake, B. (2013). Another gender gap: Men spend more time in leisure 
activities. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/06/10/another-
gender-gap-men-spend-more-time-in-leisure-activities/ 

Dunér, A., & Nordstrom, M. (2007). The roles and functions of the 
informal support networks of older people who receive formal 
support: A Swedish qualitative study. Ageing & Society, 27, 67– 85. 
doi:10.1017/ S0144686X06005344 

Easterlin, R. A. (2006). Life cycle happiness and its sources: 
Intersections of psychology, economics, and demography. Journal 
of Economic Psychology, 27, 463-482. 

Eastley, R., & Wilcock, G. K. (1997). Prevalence and correlates of 
aggressive behaviors occurring in patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 12, 484-487. 

Elsesser, L., & Peplau, L. A. (2006). The glass partition: Obstacles to 
cross-sex friendships at work. Human Relations, 59(8), 1077–1100. 

Emslie, C., Hunt, K., & Lyons, A. (2013. The role of alcohol in forging 
and maintaining friendships amongst Scottish men in midlife. 
Health Psychology, 32(10, 33-41. 

Ericsson, K. A., Feltovich, P. J., & Prietula, M. J. (2006). Studies of 
expertise from psychological perspectives. In K. Ericsson, N. 
Charness & P. Feltovich (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of expertise 
and expert performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Erikson, E. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton & 


Company. Erikson, E. (1959). Identity and the life cycle. New York: 
Norton & Company. Erikson, E. (1982). The life cycle completed.
New York: Norton & Company. 

Fehr, B. (2008). Friendship formation. In S. Sprecher, A. Wenzel, & J. 
Harvey (Eds.), Handbook of Relationship Initiation (pp.29–54). New 
York, NY: Psychology Press. 

Ferrie, J. E., Shipley, M. J., Cappuccio, F. P., Brunner, E., Miller, M. A., 
Kumari, M., & Marmot, M. G. (2007). A prospective study of change 
in sleep duration: Associations with mortality in the Whitehall II 
cohort. Sleep, 30(12), 1659. 

Ford, E. S., Li, C., & Zhao, G. (2010). Prevalence and correlates of 
metabolic syndrome based on a harmonious definition among 
adults in the US. Journal of Diabetes, 2(3), 180-193. 

Friedman, M., & Rosenman, R. (1959). Association of specific overt 
behaviour pattern with blood and cardiovascular findings. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 169, 1286–1296. 

Fry, R. (2017). It’s becoming more common for young adults to live 
at home-and for longer stretches. Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/05/05/its-
becoming-more-common-for-young-adults-to-live-at-home-
and- for-longer-stretches/ft_17-05-03_livingathome_bygen2/ 

Füllgrabe, C., Moore, B. C. J., & Stone, M. A. (2015). Age-group 
differences in speech identification despite matched audio 
metrically normal hearing: contributions from auditory temporal 
processing and cognition. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 6, 
1-25. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2014.00347 

Fung, H. H. (2013). Aging in culture. Gerontologist, 53(3), 369-377. 

Gerstel, N., & Gallagher, S. K. (1993). Kinkeeping and distress: 
Gender, recipients of care, and work–family conflict. Journal of 
Marriage and the Family, 55, 598–607. 

Gibbons, C., Creese, J., Tran, M., Brazil, K., Chambers, L., Weaver, B., 
& Bedard, M. (2014). The psychological and health consequences 
of caring for a spouse with dementia: A critical comparison of 
husbands and wives. Journal of Women & Aging, 26, 3-21. 


Gilleard, C., & Higgs, P. (2000). Cultures of aging: Self, citizen and the 
body. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Publishers. 

Goldscheider, F., & Kaufman, G. (2006). Willingness to stepparent: 
Attitudes about partners who already have children. Journal of 
Family Issues, 27, 1415 – 1436. 

Goldscheider, F., & Sassler, S. (2006). Creating stepfamilies: 
Integrating children into the study of union formation. Journal of 
Marriage and Family, 68, 275 – 291. 

Gorchoff, S. M., John, O. P., & Helson, R. (2008). Contextualizing 
change in marital satisfaction during middle age. Psychological 
Science, 19, 1194–1200. 

Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (2000). The timing of divorce: 
Predicting when a couple will divorce over a 14-year period. 
Journal of Marriage & the Family, 62, 737-745. 

Greene, S. M., Anderson, E. R., Hetherington, E., Forgtch, M. S., 
& DeGarmo, D. S. (2003). Risk and resilience after divorce. In 
F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal family processes: Growing diversity and 
complexity (3rd ed., pp. 96-120). New York: Guilford Press. 

Greenfield, E. A., & Marks, N. F. (2006). Linked lives: Adult children’s 
problems and their parents’ psychological and relational well-
being. Journal of Marriage and Family, 68, 442-454. 

Greenfield, E. A., Vaillant, G. E., & Marks, N. F. (2009). Do formal 
religious participation and spiritual perceptions have 
independent linkages with diverse dimensions of psychological 
well-being? Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 50, 196-212. 

Gripsrud, J. (2007). Television and the European public sphere. 
European Journal of Communication, 22, 479-492. 

Grzywacz, J. G. & Keyes, C. L. (2004). Toward health promotion: 
Physical and social behaviors in complete health. Journal of Health 
Behavior, 28(2), 99-111. 

Ha, J., Hong, J., Seltzer, M. M., & Greenberg, J. S. (2008). Age and 
gender differences in the well-being of midlife and aging parents 
with children with mental health or developmental problems: 
Report of a national study. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 
49, 301-316. 


Harrison, J., Barrow, S., Gask, L., & Creed, F. (1999). Social 
determinants of GHQ score by postal survey. Journal of Public 
Health Medicine, 21, 283–288. doi:10.1093/pubmed/21.3.283 

Hawkley, L. C., Hughes, M. E., Waite, L. J., Masi, C. M., Thisted, 
R. A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2008). From social structural factors to 
perceptions of relationship quality and loneliness: The Chicago 
health, aging, and marital status transitions and health outcomes 
social relations study. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B: 
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 63, 375–384. 
doi:10.1093/geronb/ 63.6.S375 

Hayslip Jr., B., Henderson, C. E., & Shore, R. J. (2003). The Structure 
of Grandparental Role Meaning. Journal of Adult Development, 
10(1), 1-13. 

Hedlund, J., Antonakis, J., & Sternberg, R. J. (2002). Tacit knowledge 
and practical intelligence: Understanding the lessons of experience. 
Retrieved from http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/army/
ari_tacit_knowledge.pdf 

Herman-Stabl, M. A., Stemmler, M., & Petersen, A. C. (1995). 
Approach and avoidant coping: Implications for adolescent 
mental health. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 24, 649–665. 

Hetherington, E. M. & Kelly, J. (2002). For better or worse: Divorce 
reconsidered. New York, NY: Norton. 

Holland, K. (2014). Why America’s campuses are going gray. CNBC. 
Retrieved from http://www.cnbc.com/2014/08/28/why- 
americas-campuses-are-going-gray.html 

Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B., & Layton, J. B. (2010). Social 
relationships and mortality risk: a meta-analytic review. PLoS 
Medicine, 7(7), e1000316. 

Hooker, E., & Pressman, S. (2016). The healthy life. NOBA. Retrieved 
from http://nobaproject.com/modules/the-healthy-life 

Horn, J. L., Donaldson, G., & Engstrom, R. (1981). Apprehension, 
memory, and fluid intelligence decline in adulthood. Research on 
Aging, 3(1), 33-84. 

House, J. S., Landis, K. R., & Umberson, D. (1988). Social relationships 
and health. Science, 241, 540–545 


Hu, G., Qiao, Q., Tuomilehto, J., Balkau, B., Borch, Johnsen, K., & 
Pyorala, K. (2004). Prevalence of metabolic syndrome and its 
relation to all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in non-diabetic 
European men and women. Archives of Internal Medicine, 164(10),
1066-1076. 

Huang, J. (2007). Hormones and female sexuality. In M. Tepper & 
A. F. Owens (Eds.), Sexual Health, Vol 2: Physical Foundations (pp. 
43-78). Westport, CT: Praeger. 

Humes, L. E., Kewley-Port, D., Fogerty, D., & Kinney, D. (2010). 
Measures of hearing threshold and temporal processing across 
the adult lifespan. Hearing Research, 264(1/2), 30-40. doi:10.1016/
j.heares.2009.09.010 

International Labour Organization. (2011). Global Employment 
Trends: 2011. Retrieved from http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/
groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/@publ/documents/
publication/wcms_150440.pdf 

Iribarren, C., Sidney, S., Bild, D. E., Liu, K., Markovitz, J. H., Roseman, 
J. M., & Matthews, K. (2000). Association of hostility with coronary 
artery calcification in young adults. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 283, 2546–2551. 

Jackson, G. R. & Owsley, C. (2000). Scotopic sensitivity during 
adulthood. Vision Research, 40 (18), 2467-2473. doi:10.1016/
S0042-6989(00)00108-5 

Jones, J. M. (2013). In U.S., 40% Get Less than Recommended Amount 
of Sleep. Gallup. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/
166553/less-recommended- amount 
sleep.aspx?g_source=sleep%202013&g_medium=search&g_campaign=tiles 

Kagawa-Singer, M., Wu, K., & Kawanishi, Y. (2002). Comparison of 
the menopause and midlife transition between Japanese 
American and European American women. Medical Anthropology 
Quarterly, 16(1), 64-91. 

Kang, S. W., & Marks, N. F. (2014). Parental caregiving for a child 
with special needs, marital strain, and physical health: Evidence 


from National Survey of Midlife in the U.S. 2005. Contemporary 
Perspectives in Family Research, 8A, 183- 209. 

Karakelides, H., & Nair, K. S. (2005). Sarcopenia of aging and its 
metabolic impact. Current Topics in Developmental Biology, 68, 
123-148. 

Kasper, T. (2015). Why you only need 7 hours of sleep. American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine. Retrieved from 
http://sleepeducation.org/news/2015/06/03/why-you-only-
need-7-hours-of-sleep 

Kaufman, B. E., & Hotchkiss, J. L. 2003. The economics of labor 
markets (6th ed.). Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western. 

Kaufman, S. B., & Gregoire, C. (2016). How to cultivate creativity.
Scientific American Mind, 27(1), 62-67. 

Kaur, S., Walia, I., & Singh, A. (2004). How menopause affects the 
lives of women in suburban Chandigarh, India. Climacteric, 7(2), 
175-180. 

Knowles, M. S., Holton, E. F., & Swanson, R. A. (1998). The adult 
learner: A neglected species. Houston: Gulf Pub., Book Division. 

Kochanek, K. D., Murphy, S. L., Xu, J., & Arias, E. (2019). Deaths: Final 
data for 2017. National Vital Statistics Reports, 68(9), 1-77. 

Kouzis, A. C., & Eaton, W. W. (1998). Absence of social networks, 
social support, and health services utilization. Psychological 
Medicine, 28, 1301–1310. doi:10.1017/S0033291798007454 

Krause, N. A., Herzog, R., & Baker, E. (1992). Providing support to 
others and well-being in later life. Journal of Gerontology: 
Psychological Sciences, 47, P300-311. 

Kühnel, J., & Sonnentag, S. (2011). How long do you benefit from 
vacation? A closer look at the fade-out vacation effects. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 32, 125-143. 

Kushida, C. (2005). Sleep deprivation: basic science, physiology, and 
behavior. London, England: Informal Healthcare. 

Lachman, M. E. (2004). Development in midlife. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 55(1), 305-331. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.psych.55.090902.141521 


Landsford, J. E., Antonucci, T.C., Akiyama, H., & Takahashi, K. (2005). 
A quantitative and qualitative approach to social relationships and 
well-being in the United States and Japan. Journal of Comparative 
Family Studies, 36, 1-22. 

Leach, M. S., & Braithwaite, D. O. (1996). A binding tie: Supportive 
communication of family kinkeepers. Journal of Applied 
Communication Research, 24, 200–216. 

Lee, B., Lawson, K. M., Chang, P., Neuendorf, C., Dmitrieva, N. O., 
& Ameida, D. H. (2015). Leisure-time physical activity moderates 
the longitudinal associations between work-family spillover and 
physical health. Journal of Leisure Research, 47(4), 444-466. 

Levinson, D. J. (1978). The seasons of a man’s life. New York: Knopf. 

Livingston, G. (2014). Four in ten couples are saying I do again. In 
Chapter 3. The differing demographic profiles of first-time marries, 
remarried and divorced adults. Pew Research Center. Retrieved 
from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/11/14/
chapter-3-the-differing-demographic-profiles-of-first-time-
married- remarried-and-divorced-adults/ 

Madden, S., St Pierre-Hansen, N., & Kelly L. (2010). First Nations 
women’s knowledge of menopause: Experiences and perspectives. 
Canadian Family Physician, 56(9), e331-e337. 

Malik, S. (2004). Impact of the metabolic syndrome on mortality 
from coronary heart disease, cardiovascular disease, and all 
causes in United States adults. Circulation, 110(10), 1245-1250. 

Malone, J. C., Liu, S. R., Vaillant, G. E., Rentz, D. M., & Waldinger, R. J. 
(2016). Midlife Eriksonian psychosocial development: Setting the 
stage for late-life cognitive and emotional health. Developmental 
Psychology, 52(3), 496-508. 

Marketing Charts Staff. (2014). Are young people watching less TV?
Retrieved from http://www.marketingcharts.com/television/
are-young-people-watching-less-tv-24817/ 

Martin, L. J. (2014). Aging changes in hair and nails. U.S. National 
Library of Medicine. Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/ency/article/004005.htm 

Matthews, K. A., Glass, D. C., Rosenman, R. H., & Bortner, R. W. 


(1977). Competitive drive, pattern A, and coronary heart disease: 
A further analysis of some data from the Western Collaborative 
Group Study. Journal of Chronic Diseases, 30, 489–498. 

Mayo Clinic. (2014a). Heart disease. Retrieved from 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/heart- 
disease/basics/definition/con-20034056 

Mayo Clinic. (2014b). Metabolism and weight loss: How you burn 
calories. Retrieved from http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy- 
lifestyle/weight-loss/in-depth/metabolism/art-20046508 

McKenna, K. A. (2008) MySpace or your place: Relationship initiation 
and development in the wired and wireless world. In S. Sprecher, 
A. Wenzel, & J. Harvey (Eds.), Handbook of relationship initiation(pp. 235–247). New York, NY: Psychology Press. 

McKenna, K. A., Green, A. S., & Gleason, M. E. J. (2002). Relationship 
formation on the Internet: What’s the big attraction? Journal of 
Social Issues, 58, 9–31. 

Metlife. (2011). Metlife study of caregiving costs to working caregivers: 
Double jeopardy for baby boomers caring for their parents.
Retrieved from http://www.caregiving.org/wp-content/
uploads/2011/06/mmi-caregiving-costs-working- 
caregivers.pdf 

Maillard, P., Sashardi, S., Beiser, A., Himail, J. J., Au, R., Fletcher, E., 
…. DeCarli, C. (2012). Effects of systolic blood pressure on white-
matter integrity in young adults in the Farmington Heart Study: A 
cross-sectional study. The Lancet: Neurology, 11(12), 1039-1047. 

Miller, T. Q., Smith, T. W., Turner, C. W., Guijarro, M. L., & Hallet, A. J. 
(1996). Meta-analytic review of research on hostility and physical 
health. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 322–348. 

Mitchell, B. A., & Lovegreen, L. D. (2009). The empty nest syndrome 
in midlife families: A multimethod exploration of parental gender 
differences and cultural dynamics. Journal of Family Issues, 30,1651–1670. 

Montenegro, X. P. (2003). Lifestyles, dating, and romance: A study of 
midlife singles. Washington, DC: AARP. 


Monthly Labor Review. (2013). Percentage of the non-
institutionalized civilian workforce employed by gender & age.
Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/cps_aa2013.htm 

Moravec, C. S. (2008). Biofeedback therapy in cardiovascular 
disease: rationale and research overview. Cleveland Clinic Journal 
of Medicine, 75, S35–S38. 

Morita, Y., Iwamoto, I., Mizuma, W., Kuwahata, T., Matsuo, T., 
Yoshinaga, M., &Douchi, T. (2006). Precedence of the shift of 
body-fat distribution over the change in body composition after 
menopause. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 32, 513-516. 

Morley, J. E., Baumgartner, R. N., Roubenoff, R., Mayer, J., & Nair, K. 
S. (2001). Sarcopenia. Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine, 
137(4), 231-243. 

Moskowitz, R. J. (2014). Wrinkles. U. S. National Library of Medicine. 
Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/
article/003252.htm 

Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). The concept of flow. In 
C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology(pp. 89-105). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Nassir, F., Rector, S., Hammoud, G.M., & Ibdah, J.A. (2015). 
Pathogenesis and prevention of hepatic steatosis. 
Gastroenterology & Hepatology, 11(3), 167-175. 

National Alliance for Caregiving. (2015). Caregiving in the U.S. 2015. 
Retrieved from http://www.caregiving.org/caregiving2015. 

National Eye Institute. (2009). Facts about floaters. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/floaters/floaters 

National Eye Institute. (2013). Facts about dry eye. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/dryeye/dryeye 

National Eye Institute. (2015). Facts about diabetic eye disease. 
Retrieved from: https://nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic/retinopathy 

National Eye Institute. (2016). Facts about presbyopia. Department of 


Health and Human Services. Retrieved from https://nei.nih.gov/
health/errors/presbyopia 

National Institutes of Health. (2007). Menopause: MedlinePlus 
Medical Encyclopedia. Retrieved from http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/ency/article/000894.htm 

National Institutes of Health. (2013). Gallstones. U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services. Retrieved from 
http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/
digestive-diseases/gallstones/Pages/facts.aspx 

National Institutes of Health. (2014a). The A1C and diabetes. Retrieved 
from http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health- information/health-
topics/diagnostic-tests/a1c-test-diabetes/Pages/index.aspx 

National Institutes of Health (2014b). Age changes in the lungs.
Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/
article/004011.htm 

National Institutes of Health (2014c). Sweet stuff: How sugars and 
sweeteners affect your health. Retrieved from 
https://newsinhealth.nih.gov/issue/oct2014/feature1 

National Institutes of Health. (2014d). What is atherosclerosis? 
Retrieved from http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health- topics/
topics/atherosclerosis 

National Institutes of Health. (2015). Cancer. Retrieved from 
https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/understanding/what-
is-cancer 

National Institutes of Health. (2016a). Facts about diabetes. Retrieved 
from http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health- 
topics/Diabetes/diabetes-facts/Pages/default.aspx 

National Institutes of Health (2016b). Handout on Health: Rheumatoid 
Arthritis. Retrieved from http://www.niams.nih.gov/
health%5Finfo/rheumatic%5Fdisease/ 

National Institutes of Health. (2016c). Older drivers: How health 
affects driving. Retrieved from http://nihseniorhealth.gov/
olderdrivers/howhealthaffectsdriving/01.html 

National Sleep Foundation. (2015). 2015 Sleep in America™ poll finds 
pain a significant challenge when it comes to Americans’ sleep. 


National Sleep Foundation. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/media-center/press-release/
2015-sleep- america-poll 

National Sleep Foundation. (2016). Menopause and Insomnia. 
National Sleep Foundation. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/ask-the-expert/menopause-and-
insomnia 

Neidleman, M. T., Wambacq, I., Besing, J., Spitzer, J. B., & Koehnke, 
J. (2015). The Effect of Background Babble on Working Memory in 
Young and Middle-Aged Adults. Journal of the American Academy 
of Audiology, 26(3), 220-228. doi:10.3766/jaaa.26.3.3 

Neugarten, B. L. (1968). The awareness of middle aging. In B. L. 
Neugarten (Ed.), Middle age and aging (pp. 93-98). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Neugarten, B. L., & Weinstein, K. K. (1964). The changing American 
grandparent. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 26, 199–204. 

Newton, T., Buckley, A., Zurlage, M., Mitchell, C., Shaw, A., & 
Woodruff-Borden, J. (2008). Lack of a close confidant: Prevalence 
and correlates in a medically underserved primary care sample. 
Psychology, Health & Medicine, 13, 185– 192. doi:10.1080/ 
13548500701405491 

Nimrod, G., Kleiber, D. A., & Berdychevesky, L. (2012). Leisure in 
coping with depression. Journal of Leisure Research, 44(4), 414-449. 

Norman, G. (2005). Research in clinical reasoning: Past history and 
current trends. Medical Education, 39, 418–427. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-2929.2005.02127.x 

North American Menopause Society. (2016). Menopause FAQs: 
Understanding the symptoms. Retrieved from 
Http://www.menopause.org/for-women/expert-answers-to-
frequently-asked-questions-about-menopause/menopause- 
faqs-understanding-the-symptoms 

Nwankwo T., Yoon S. S., Burt, V., & Gu, Q. (2013) Hypertension among 
adults in the US: National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey, 2011-2012. NCHS Data Brief, No. 133. Hyattsville, MD: 


National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, US Dept of Health and Human Services. 

Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2008). The 
physical activity guidelines for Americans. Retrieved from 
http://health.gov/
paguidelines/?_ga=1.177233189.1671103883.1467228401 

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). 
Average annual hours actually worked per worker. OECD Stat. 
Retrieved from http://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?DataSetCode=ANHRS 

Palacios, S., Henderson V. W., & Siseles, N. (2010). Age of menopause 
and impact of climacteric symptoms by geographical region. 
Climacteric, 13(5), 419-428. 

Parker, K. & Patten, E. (2013). The sandwich generation: Rising 
financial burdens for middle-aged Americans. Pew Research 
Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/
01/30/the-sandwich-generation/ 

Patel, C., Marmot, M. G., & Terry, D. J. (1981). Controlled trial of 
biofeedback-aided behavioural methods in reducing mild 
hypertension. British Medical Journal (Clinical research ed.), 282, 
2005–2008. 

Pattison, K. (2015). Sleep deficit. Experience Life. Retrieved from 
https://experiencelife.com/article/sleep-deficit/ 

Payne, K. K. (2015). The remarriage rate: Geographic variation, 2013. 
National Center for Family & Marriage Research. Retrieved from 
http://bgsu.edu/ncfmr/resources/data/family-profiles/payne-
remarriage-rate-fp-15-08.html 

Peterson, B. E. & Duncan, L. E. (2007). Midlife women’s generativity 
and authoritarianism: Marriage, motherhood, and 10 years of 
aging. Psychology and Aging, 22(3), 411-419. 

Peterson, B. E., Smirles, K. A., & Wentworth, P. A. (1997). Generativity 
and authoritarianism: Implications for personality, political 
involvement, and parenting. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 72, 1202-1216. 

Pew Research Center. (2010). The return of the multi-generational 


family household. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/03/18/the-return-of-
the-multi-generational-family-household/ 

Pew Research Center. (2010a). How the great recession has changed 
life in America. Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/
2010/06/30/how-the-great-recession-has-changed-life-in-
america/ 

Pew Research Center. (2010b). Section 5: Generations and the great 
recession. Retrieved from http://www.people- press.org/2011/
11/03/section-5-generations-and-the-great-recession/ 

Pew Research Center. (2015). Caring for aging parents. Family 
support in graying societies. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/05/21/4-caring-for-
aging-parents/ 

Pew Research Center. (2016). The Gender gap in religion around the 
world. Retrieved from http://www.pewforum.org/2016/03/22/
the-gender-gap-in-religion-around-the-world/ 

Phillips, M. L. (2011). The mind at midlife. American Psychological 
Association. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/monitor/2011/
04/mind-midlife.aspx 

Proctor, D. N., Balagopal, P., & Nair, K. S. (1998). Age-related 
sarcopenia in humans is associated with reduced synthetic rates 
of specific muscle proteins. Journal of Nutrition, 128(2 Suppl.), 
351S-355S. 

Project Time-Off (2016). The state of American vacation: How 
vacation became a casualty of our work culture. Retrieved from 
http://www.projecttimeoff.com/research/state-american-
vacation-2016 

Qian, X., Yarnal, C. M., Almeida, D. M. (2013). Does leisure time as a 
stress coping source increase affective complexity? Applying the 
Dynamic Model of Affect (DMA). Journal of Leisure Research, 45(3), 
393-414. 

Ray, R., Sanes, M., & Schmitt, J. (2013). No-vacation nation revisited. 


Center for Economic Policy Research. Retrieved from 
http://cepr.net/publications/reports/no-vacation-nation-2013 

Ray, R., & Schmitt, J. (2007). No vacation nation USA – A comparison 
of leave and holiday in OECD countries. Retrieved from 
http://www.law.harvard.edu/programs/lwp/papers/
No_Holidays.pdf 

Research Network on Successful Midlife Development. (2007, 
February 7). Midlife Research – MIDMAC WebSite. Retrieved from 
http://midmac.med.harvard.edu/research.html 

Riordan, C. M., & Griffeth, R. W. (1995). The opportunity for 
friendship in the workplace: An underexplored construct. Journal 
of Business and Psychology, 10, 141–154. 

Rossi, A. S. (2004). The menopausal transition and aging process. 
In How healthy are we: A national study of health in midlife. (pp. 
550-575). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Rubin, M., Scevak, J., Southgate, E., Macqueen, S., Williams, P., & 
Douglas, H. (2018). Older women, deeper learning, and greater 
satisfaction at university: Age and gender predict university 
students’ learning approach and degree satisfaction. Diversity in 
Higher Education, 11(1), 82-96. 

Saad, L. (2014). The 40 hour work week is actually longer – by 
7 hours. Gallop. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/
175286/hour-workweek-actually-longer-seven-hours.aspx 

Salmon, P. (2001). Effects of physical exercise on anxiety, depression, 
and sensitivity to stress: A unifying theory. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 21(1), 33–61. 

Salthouse, T. A. (2004). What and when of cognitive aging. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 140–144. Sandgerg-Thoma, 
S. E., Synder, A. R., & Jang, B. J. (2015). Exiting and returning to 
the parental home for boomerang kids. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 77, 806-818. doi:10.1111/jomf.12183 

Sawatzky, R., Ratner, P. A., & Chiu, L. (2005). A meta-analysis of 
the relationship between spirituality and quality of life. Social 
Indicators Research, 72, 153-188. 


Schaie, K. W. (2005). Developmental influences on adult intelligence 
the Seattle longitudinal study. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Scheibe, S., Kunzmann, U. & Baltes, P. B. (2009). New territories 
of Positive Lifespan Development: Wisdom and Life Longings. In 
C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Oxford handbook of Positive 
Psychology (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Schick, V., Herbenick, D., Reece, M., Sanders, S., A., Dodge, B., 
Middlestadt, S. E., & Fortenberry, J. D. (2010). Sexual behaviors, 
condom use, and sexual health of Americans over 50: Implications 
for sexual health promotion for older adults. Journal of Sexual 
Medicine, 7(Suppl. 5), 315-329. 

Schuler, P., Vinci, D., Isosaari, R., Philipp, S., Todorovich, J., Roy, J., & 
Evans, R. (2008). Body-shape perceptions and body mass index of 
older African American and European American women. Journal 
of Cross-Cultural Gerontology, 23(3), 255-264. 

Schulz, R., Newsom, J., Mittelmark, M., Burton, L., Hirsch, C., & 
Jackson, S. (1997). Health effects of caregiving: The caregiver 
health effects study. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 19, 110-116. 

Seccombe, K., & Warner, R. L. (2004). Marriages and families: 
Relationships in social context. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/
Thomson Learning. 

Seltzer, M. M., Floyd, F., Song, J., Greenberg, J., & Hong, J. (2011). 
Midlife and aging parents of adults with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities: Impacts of lifelong parenting. 
American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disability, 
116, 479-499. 

Selye, H. (1946). The general adaptation syndrome and the diseases 
of adaptation. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology, 6, 117– 230. 

Shure, J., & Cahan, V. (1998, September 10). Launch an exercise 
program today, say Aging Institute, Senator John Glenn. National 
Institute on Aging. Retrieved from http://www.nia.nih.gov/
NewsAndEvents/PressReleases/PR19980910Launch.htm 

Slevin, K. F. (2010). “If I had lots of money…I’d have a body makeover”: 
Managing the aging body. Social Forces, 88(3), 1003-1020. 

Sorensen, P., & Cooper, N. J. (2010). Reshaping the family man: A 


grounded theory study of the meaning of grandfatherhood. 
Journal of Men’s Studies, 18(2), 117-136. doi:10.3149/jms.1802.117 

Spiegel, D., Kraemer, H., Bloom, J., & Gottheil, E. (1989). Effect of 
psychosocial treatment on survival of patients with metastatic 
breast cancer. The Lancet, 334, 888–891. 

Stern, C., & Konno, R. (2009). Physical Leisure activities and their 
role in preventing dementia: A systematic review. International 
Journal of Evidence-Based Healthcare, 7, 270-282. 

Stewart, S. D., Manning, W. D., & Smock, P. J. (2003). Union formation 
among men in the US: Does having prior children matter? Journal 
of Marriage and Family, 65, 90 – 104. 

Su, D., Wu, X., Zhang, Y., Li, H., Zhang, J., & Zhou, L. (2012). 
Depression and social support between China’ rural and urban 
empty-nest elderly. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 55,564–569. 

Swierzewski, S. J. (2015). Erectile Dysfunction. Retrieved from 
http://www.healthcommunities.com/erectile- dysfunction/
overview-of-impotence.shtml 

Tangri, S., Thomas, V., & Mednick, M. (2003). Prediction of 
satisfaction among college-educated African American women. 
Journal of Adult Development, 10, 113-125. 

Taylor, B. J., Matthews, K. A., Hasler, B. P., Roecklein, K. A., Kline, C. 
E., Buysse, D. J., Kravitz, H. M., Tiani, A. G., Harlow, S. D., & Hall, 
M. H. (2016). Bedtime variability and metabolic health in midlife 
women: the SWAN Sleep Study. SLEEP, 39(2), 457–465. 

Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, 
R. A., & Updegraff, J. A. (2000). Biobehavioral responses to stress 
in females: Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-flight. Psychological 
Review, 107, 411–429. 

Teachman, J. (2008). Complex life course patterns and the risk of 
divorce in second marriages. Journal of Marriage and Family, 70, 
294 – 305. 

Teuscher, U., & Teuscher, C. (2006). Reconsidering the double 
standard of aging: Effects of gender and sexual orientation on 


facial attractiveness ratings. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 42(4), 631-639. 

Thurston, W. E, & Vissandjée, B. (2005). An ecological model for 
understanding culture as a determinant of women’s health. 
Critical Public Health, 15(3), 229-242. 

Torti, F. M., Gwyther, L. P., Reed, S. D., Friedman, J. Y., & Schulman, 
K. A. (2004). A multinational review of recent trends and reports 
in dementia caregiver burden. Alzheimer Disease and Associated 
Disorders, 18(2), 99-109. 

Tower, R. B., & Kasl, S. V. (1995). Depressive symptoms across older 
spouses and the moderating effect of marital closeness. 
Psychology and Aging, 10, 625– 638. doi:10.1037/0882-7974.10.4.625 

Twisk, J. W., Snel, J., Kemper, H. C., & van Mechelen, W. (1999). 
Changes in daily hassles and life events and the relationship with 
coronary heart disease risk factors: A 2-year longitudinal study 
in 27–29-year-old males and females. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, 46, 229–240. 

Uchida, Y., Nakashima, T., Ando, F., Niino, N., & Shimokata, H. (2003). 
Prevalence of self-perceived auditory problems and their relation 
to audiometric thresholds in a middle-aged to elderly population. 
Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 123(5), 618. 

Umberson, D., Williams, K., Powers, D., Chen, M., & Campbell, A. 
(2005). As good as it gets? A life course perspective on marital 
quality. Social Forces, 81, 493-511. 

United Health Foundation. (2016). New report finds significant health 
concerns loom for seniors in coming years. Retrieved from 
http://www.unitedhealthfoundation.org/News/Articles/Feeds/
2016/052516AHRSeniorReport.aspx?r=3 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016). American time use survey 
– 2015. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/
atus.pdf 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. (2015) 2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans. 8th Edition. Retrieved from http://health.gov/
dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/ 


U.S. Department of Labor (2016). Vacation Leave. Retrieved from 
https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/workhours/vacation_leave 

U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2012). Unemployed older 
workers: Many experience challenges regaining employment and 
face reduced retirement security. Retrieved from 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-445 

Vaillant, G. E. (1977). Adaptation of life. Boston, MA: Little, Brown 

Vaillant, G. E. (2008). Spiritual evolution: A scientific defense of faith. 
New York: Doubleday Broadway. Vaillant, G. E. (2012). Triumphs of 
experience. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Waldrop, D., Weber, J., Herald, S., Pruett, J., Cooper, K., & 
Juozapavicius, K. (1999). Wisdom and life experience: How 
grandfathers mentor their grandchildren. Journal of Aging and 
Identity, 4 (1), 33-46. 

Wang, W. & Parker, K. (2014) Record share of Americans have never 
married: As values, economics and gender patterns change. 
Retrieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/09/24/
record-share-of-americans-have-never-married/ 

WebMD. (2016). Erectile Dysfunction: Testosterone Replacement 
Therapy. Retrieved from http://www.webmd.com/erectile- 
dysfunction/guide/testosterone-replacement-
therapy?page=2#3 

Willis, S. L., & Schaie, K. W. (1999). Intellectual functioning in midlife. 
In S. L. Willis & J. D. Reid (Eds.), Life in the Middle: Psychological 
and Social Development in Middle Age (pp. 233-247). San Diego: 
Academic. 

Wong, Y. C., & Leung, J. (2012). Long-term care in China: Issues and 
prospects. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 55, 570–586. 

World Health Organization. (2018). Top 10 causes of death. Retrieved 
from https://www.who.int/gho/mortality_burden_disease/
causes_death/top_10/en/ 

World Health Organization. (2019). Burn-out an “occupational 
phenomenon”: International Classification of Diseases. Retrieved 
from: https://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/burn-
out/en/ 


Wu, Z., Sun, L., Sun, Y., Zhang, X., Tao, F., & Cui, G. (2010). Correlation 
between loneliness and social relationship among empty nest 
elderly in Anhui rural area, China. Aging and Mental Health, 14,108–112. 

Yeager, C. A., Hyer, L. A., Hobbs, B., & Coyne, A. C., (2010). Alzheimer’s 
disease and vascular dementia: The complex relationship between 
diagnosis and caregiver burden. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 
31(6), 376-384. 

Yick-Flanagan, A. (2013). Meanings of menopause: Cultural 
considerations. Retrieved from http://www.netce.com/
coursecontent.php?courseid=976 

Zuidema, S. U., de Jonghe, J. F., Verhey, F. R., & Koopman, R. T. 
(2009). Predictors of neuropsychiatric symptoms in nursing home 
patients: Influence of gender and dementia severity. International 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 24(10), 1079-1086. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 8 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


PART 
XII 
DEVELOPMENT IN LATE 
ADULTHOOD 

Learning Objectives: 

Explore and connect Psychosocial, Cognitive, 
and Psychosexual Development 
Explore and connect another Theory, Approach, 
or Perspective to work in critical thinking skills for 
client assessments 
Exploring important aspects of a person’s 
experience and ability to justify why they are 
important 



Vignette 

Alaina
Photo by Vladimir Soares on Unsplash 

Alaina is an 85 y/o African 
American woman who lives 
alone with her small dog, Gus. 
Alaina lost her husband a few 
years ago after a painful battle 
with prostate cancer. 


Alaina and her husband had a 
wonderful, supportive 
relationship. Alaina cared for 
her husband throughout his illness, but it took a toll on her both 
physically and emotionally. She still struggles with grief over his death 
and has days where she still cries uncontrollably. Her family checks in 
on her often but struggle with knowing what to do on days she is 
experiencing deep sadness. Gus has been a great support for her and 
has been critical in helping her get through some of her hardest times. 

Alaina is aware of the changes that occurred over the years in the 
neighborhood where she has so many memories and enjoyed life for 
so long. Despite the increasing crime, she continues to feel safe in her 
home as she maintains relationships with her friends who live close 
by and with the support of her church family, who also check in on her 
weekly. 

Alaina has been experiencing some increased health problems 
recently. She suffers from back pains, osteoporosis, and diabetes. She 
has been prescribed several medications to manage her health issues 
and has been experiencing increased side effects due to the new 
medicines. Alaina works hard to maintain her daily routine but her 
friends have noticed that she has started to engage in some unusual 
behaviors, such as walking without Gus or being out alone after dark, 
as well as self-report she has had some dizzy spells and was falling 
more. Her friends have shared their concerns with her children, and 
they have decided to meet with their mother to find out more 
information to determine how to best support her needs. 


Critical Thinking: 

1. What stage of Erikson’s Theory of Psychosocial 
Development are they currently in? Are they 
meeting the goals of this stage? Examples? Are 
they demonstrating any struggles with their goals 
in this stage? Examples? 
2. What theory, approach, or perspective from 
previous Dimensions (PIE, Biopsychosocial, 
Sociocultural, or Social Change) would you use to 
assess this client? Why? 
3. What do you feel are the most important 
aspects (physical development, attachment, sexual 
development, etc) to consider for this client? 
Why? 


References 

https://www.cswe.org/Education-Resources.aspx 

 



Chapter 28: Physical 
Development in Late 
Adulthood 

Chapter 28 Learning Objectives 

Describe different theories of aging 
Describe the changes in physical appearance in late 
adulthood 
Describe the sensory changes in late adulthood 
Describe chronic health conditions during late 
adulthood 
Describe the importance of nutrition and exercise 
in late adulthood 
Describe the physical and functional changes in the 
brain during late adulthood 
Explain what happens in Parkison’s disease 
Explain how sleep patterns change in late 
adulthood 
Explain how sexuality changes in late adulthood 



Theories of Aging 

Why do we age? There are many theories that attempt to explain 
how we age, however, researchers still do not fully understand what 
factors contribute to the human lifespan (Jin, 2010). Research on 
aging is constantly evolving and includes a variety of studies 
involving genetics, biochemistry, animal models, and human 
longitudinal studies (NIA, 2011a). According to Jin (2010), modern 
biological theories of human aging involve two categories. The first 
is Programmed Theories that follow a biological timetable, possibly a 
continuation of childhood development. This timetable would depend 
on “changes in gene expression that affect the systems responsible 
for maintenance, repair, and defense responses,” (p. 72). The second 
category includes Damage or Error Theories which emphasize 
environmental factors that cause cumulative damage in organisms.
Examples from each of these categories will be discussed. 

Genetics: One’s genetic make-up certainly plays a role in longevity, 
but scientists are still attempting to identify which genes are 
responsible. Based on animal models, some genes promote longer 
life, while other genes limit longevity. Specifically, longevity may 
be due to genes that better equip someone to survive a disease. 
For others, some genes may accelerate the rate of aging, while 


others decrease the rate. To help determine which genes promote 
longevity and how they operate, researchers scan the entire 
genome and compare genetic variants in those who live longer 
with those who have an average or shorter lifespan. For example, 
a National Institutes of Health study identified genes possibly 
associated with blood fat levels and cholesterol, both risk factors for 
coronary disease and early death (NIA, 2011a). 

Researchers believe that it is most likely a combination of many 
genes that affect the rate of aging. 

Evolutionary Theory: Evolutionary psychology emphasizes the 
importance of natural selection; that is, those genes that allow one 
to survive and reproduce will be more likely to be transmitted to 
offspring. Genes associated with aging, such as Alzheimer’s Disease, 
do not appear until after the individual has passed their main 
reproductive years. Consequently, natural selection has not 
eliminated these damaging disorders from the gene pool. If these 
detrimental disorders occurred earlier in the development cycle, 
they may have been eliminated already (Gems, 2014). 

Cellular Clock Theory: This theory suggests that biological aging 
is due to the fact that normal cells cannot divide indefinitely. This is 
known as the Hayflick limit and is evidenced in cells studied in test 
tubes, which divide about 40-60 times before they stop (Bartlett, 
2014). But what is the mechanism behind this cellular senescence? 
At the end of each chromosomal strand is a sequence of DNA that 
does not code for any particular protein, but protects the rest of the 
chromosome, which is called a telomere. With each replication, the 
telomere gets shorter. Once it becomes too short the cell does one 
of three things. It can stop replicating by turning itself off, called 
cellular senescence. It can stop replicating by dying, called 
apoptosis. Or, as in the development of cancer, it can continue 
to divide and become abnormal. Senescent cells can also create 
problems. While they may be turned off, they are not dead, thus 
they still interact with other cells in the body and can lead to an 
increased risk of disease. When we are young, senescent cells may 


reduce our risk of serious diseases such as cancer, but as we age 
they increase our risk of such problems (NIA, 2011a). Understanding 
why cellular senescence changes from being beneficial to being 
detrimental are still under investigation. The answer may lead to 
some important clues about the aging process. 

DNA Damage: Over time DNA, which contains the genetic code for 
all organisms, accumulates damage. This is usually not a concern 
as our cells are capable of repairing damage throughout our life. 
Further, some damage is harmless. However, some damage cannot 
be repaired and remains in our DNA. Scientists believe that this 
damage, and the body’s inability to fix itself, is an important part 
of aging (NIA, 2011a). As DNA damage accumulates with increasing 
age, it can cause cells to deteriorate and malfunction (Jin, 2010). 
Factors that can damage DNA include ultraviolet radiation, cigarette 
smoking, and exposure to hydrocarbons, such as auto exhaust and 
coal (Dollemore, 2006). 

Mitochondrial Damage: Damage to mitochondrial DNA can lead 


to a decaying of the mitochondria, which is a cell organelle that 
uses oxygen to produce energy from food. The mitochondria convert 
oxygen to adenosine triphosphate (ATP) which provides the energy 
for the cell. When damaged, mitochondria become less efficient and 
generate less energy for the cell and can lead to cellular death (NIA, 
2011a). 

Free Radicals: When the mitochondria use oxygen to produce 
energy, they also produce potentially harmful byproducts called 
oxygen free radicals (NIA, 2011a). The free radicals are missing an 
electron and create instability in surrounding molecules by taking 
electrons from them. 

There is a snowball effect (A takes from B and then B takes from C, 


etc.) that creates more free radicals that disrupt the cell and causes 
it to behave abnormally (See Figure 9.11). Some free radicals are 
helpful as they can destroy bacteria and other harmful organisms, 
but for the most part, they cause damage in our cells and tissue. 
Free radicals are identified with disorders seen in those of advanced 
age, including cancer, atherosclerosis, cataracts, and 
neurodegeneration. Some research has supported adding 
antioxidants to our diets to counter the effects of free radical 
damage because the antioxidants can donate an electron that can 
neutralize damaged molecules. However, the research on the 
effectiveness of antioxidants is not conclusive (Harvard School of 
Public Health, 2016). 

Immune and Hormonal Stress Theories: Ever notice how quickly 
U.S. presidents seem to age? Before and after photos reveal how 
stress can play a role in the aging process. 

To understand how this stress affects aging, researchers note that 
both problems with the innate and adaptive immune system play a 
key role. The innate immune system is made up of the skin, mucous 
membranes, cough reflex, stomach acid, and specialized cells that 


alert the body of an impending threat. With age these cells lose their 
ability to communicate as effectively, making it harder for the body 
to mobilize its defenses. The adaptive immune system includes 
the tonsils, spleen, bone marrow, thymus, circulatory system and the 
lymphatic system that work to produce and transport T cells. T-cells, 
or lymphocytes, fight bacteria, viruses, and other foreign threats to 
the body. T-cells are in a “naïve” state before they are programmed 
to fight an invader and become “memory cells”. These cells now 
remember how to fight a certain infection should the body ever 
come across this invader again. Memory cells can remain in your 
body for many decades, and why the measles vaccine you received 
as a child is still protecting you from this virus today. As older adults 
produce fewer new T-cells to be programmed, they are less able to 
fight off new threats and new vaccines work less effectively. The 
reason why the shingles vaccine works well with older adults is that 
they already have some existing memory cells against the varicella 
virus. The shingles vaccine is acting as a booster (NIA, 2011a). 

Hormonal Stress Theory, also known as Neuroendocrine Theory 
of Aging, suggests that as we age the ability of the hypothalamus to 
regulate hormones in the body begins to decline to lead to metabolic 
problems (American Federation of Aging Research (AFAR) 2011). This 
decline is linked to an excess of the stress hormone cortisol. While 
many of the body’s hormones decrease with age, cortisol does not 
(NIH, 2014a). The more stress we experience, the more cortisol 
released, and the more hypothalamic damage that occurs. Changes 
in hormones have been linked to several metabolic and hormone-
related problems that increase with age, such as diabetes (AFAR, 
2011), thyroid problems (NIH, 2013), osteoporosis, and orthostatic 
hypotension (NIH, 2014a). 


Physical Changes of Aging 

The Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging (BLSA) (NIA, 2011b) 
began in 1958 and has traced the aging process in 1,400 people from 
age 20 to 90. Researchers from the BLSA have found that the aging 
process varies significantly from individual to individual and from 
one organ system to another. However, some key generalization can 
be made including: 

Heart muscles thicken with age 
Arteries become less flexible 
Lung capacity diminishes 
Kidneys become less efficient in removing waste from the 
blood 
Bladder loses its ability to store urine 
Brain cells also lose some functioning, but new neurons can 
also be produced. 


Many of these changes are determined by genetics, lifestyle, and 
disease. Other changes in late adulthood include: 

Body Changes: Everyone’s body shape changes naturally as they 
age. According to the National Library of Medicine (2014) after age 
30 people tend to lose lean tissue, and some of the cells of the 
muscles, liver, kidney, and other organs are lost. Tissue loss reduces 
the amount of water in your body and bones may lose some of their 
minerals and become less dense (a condition called osteopenia in 
the early stages and osteoporosis in the later stages). The amount 
of body fat goes up steadily after age 30, and older individuals 
may have almost one third more fat compared to when they were 
younger. Fat tissue builds up toward the center of the body, 
including around the internal organs. 

Skin, Hair and Nails: With age skin becomes thinner, less elastic, 
lose fat, and no longer looks plump and smooth. Veins and bones 
can be seen easier, and scratches, cuts, and bumps can take longer 
to heal. Years exposed to the sun may lead to wrinkles, dryness, 


age spots, and cancer. Older people may bruise more easily, and 
it can take longer for these bruises to heal. Some medicines or 
illnesses may also cause bruising. Gravity can cause the skin to sag 
and wrinkle, and smoking can wrinkle the skin. Also, seen in older 
adults are age spots, previously called “liver spots”. They look like 
flat, brown spots and are often caused by years in the sun. Skin tags 
are small, usually flesh-colored growths of skin that have a raised 
surface. They become common as people age, especially for women, 
but both age spots and skin tags are harmless (NIA, 2015f). 

Nearly everyone has hair loss as they age, and the rate of hair 
growth slows down as many hair follicles stop producing new hairs 
(U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2019). The loss of pigment and 
subsequent graying begun in middle adulthood continues in late 
adulthood. The body and face also lose hair. Facial hair may grow 
coarser. For women, this often occurs around the chin and above 
the upper lip. 
For men, the hair of the eyebrows, ears, and nose may 
grow longer. Nails, particularly toenails, may become hard and thick. 

Lengthwise ridges may develop in the fingernails and toenails. 
However, pits, lines, changes in shape or color should be checked 


by a healthcare provider as they can be related to nutritional 
deficiencies or kidney disease (U.S. National Library of Medicine). 

Height and Weight: The tendency to become shorter as one age 
occurs among all races and both sexes. Height loss is related to 
aging changes in the bones, muscles, and joints. People typically 
lose almost one-half inch every 10 years after age 40, and height 
loss is even more rapid after age 70. A total of 1 to 3 inches in 
height is lost with aging. Changes in body weight vary for men and 
women. Men often gain weight until about age 55, and then begin 
to lose weight later in life, possibly related to a drop in the male 
sex hormone testosterone. Women usually gain weight until age 65, 
and then begin to lose weight. Weight loss later in life occurs partly 
because fat replaces lean muscle tissue, and fat weighs less than 
muscle. Diet and exercise are important factors in weight changes 
in late adulthood (National Library of Medicine, 2014). 


Sarcopenia is the loss of muscle tissue as a natural part of aging. 
Sarcopenia is most noticeable in men, and physically inactive people 
can lose as much as 3% to 5% of their muscle mass each decade 
after age 30, but even when active muscle loss still occurs (Webmd, 
2016). Symptoms include a loss of stamina and weakness, which can 
decrease physical activity and subsequently further shrink muscles. 
Sarcopenia typically happens faster around age 75, but it may also 
speed up as early as 65 or as late as 80. Factors involved in 
sarcopenia include a reduction in nerve cells responsible for 
sending signals to the muscles from the brain to begin moving, a 
decrease in the ability to turn protein into energy, and not receiving 
enough calories or protein to sustain adequate muscle mass. Any 


loss of muscle is important because it lessens strength and mobility, 
and sarcopenia is a factor in frailty and the likelihood of falls and 
fractures in older adults. Maintaining strong leg and heart muscles 
are important for independence. Weight-lifting, walking, swimming, 
or engaging in other cardiovascular exercises can help strengthen 
the muscles and prevent atrophy. 

Sensory Changes in Late Adulthood 

Vision: In late adulthood, all the senses show signs of decline, 
especially among the oldest-old. In the last chapter, you read about 
the visual changes that were beginning in middle adulthood, such as 
presbyopia, dry eyes, and problems seeing in dimmer light. By later 
adulthood, these changes are much more common. Three serious 
eye diseases are more common in older adults: Cataracts, macular 
degeneration, and glaucoma. Only the first can be effectively cured 
in most people. 

Cataracts are a clouding of the lens of the eye. The lens of the eye 
is made up of mostly water and protein. The protein is precisely 
arranged to keep the lens clear, but with age, some of the protein 
starts to clump. As more of the protein clumps together the clarity 
of the lens is reduced. While some adults in middle adulthood may 
show signs of cloudiness in the lens, the area affected is usually 
small enough to not interfere with vision. More people have 
problems with cataracts after age 60 (NIH, 2014b) and by age 75, 70% 
of adults will have problems with cataracts (Boyd, 2014). Cataracts 
also cause a discoloration of the lens, tinting it more yellow and then 
brown, which can interfere with the ability to distinguish colors 
such as black, brown, dark blue, or dark purple. 

Risk factors besides age include certain health problems such 
as diabetes, high blood pressure, and obesity, behavioral factors 
such as smoking, other environmental factors such as prolonged 
exposure to ultraviolet sunlight, previous trauma to the eye, long-


term use of steroid medication, and a family history of cataracts 
(NEI, 2016a; Boyd, 2014). Cataracts are treated by removing and 
replacing the lens of the eye with a synthetic lens. In developed 
countries, such as the United States, cataracts can be easily treated 
with surgery. 
However, in developing countries, access to such 
operations are limited, making cataracts the leading cause of 
blindness in late adulthood in the least developed countries 
(Resnikoff, Pascolini, Mariotti & Pokharel, 2004). As shown in Figure 
9.16, areas of the world with limited medical treatment for cataracts 
often results in people living more years with a serious disability. For 
example, of those living in the darkest red color on the map, more 
than 990 out of 100,00 people have a shortened lifespan due to the 
disability caused by cataracts. 

Older adults are also more likely to develop age-related macular 
degeneration, which is the loss of clarity in the center field of vision, 
due to the deterioration of the macula, the center of the retina.


Macular degeneration does not usually cause total vision loss, but 
the loss of the central field of vision can greatly impair day-to-
day functioning. There are two types of macular degeneration: dry 
and wet. The dry type is the most common form and occurs when 
tiny pieces of a fatty protein called drusen form beneath the retina. 
Eventually the macular becomes thinner and stops working 
properly (Boyd, 2016). About 10% of people with macular 
degeneration have the wet type, which causes more damage to their 
central field of vision than the dry form. This form is caused by 
abnormal development of blood vessels beneath the retina. These 
vessels may leak fluid or blood causing more rapid loss of vision than 
the dry form. 

The risk factors for macular degeneration include smoking, which 
doubles your risk (NIH, 2015a); race, as it is more common among 
Caucasians than African Americans or Hispanics/Latinos; high 
cholesterol; and a family history of macular degeneration (Boyd, 
2016). At least 20 different genes have been related to this eye 
disease, but there is no simple genetic test to determine your risk, 
despite claims by some genetic testing companies (NIH, 2015a). At 
present, there is no effective treatment for the dry type of macular 
degeneration. Some research suggests that certain patients may 
benefit from a cocktail of certain antioxidant vitamins and minerals, 
but the results are mixed at best. They are not a cure for the disease 
nor will they restore the vision that has been lost. This “cocktail” 
can slow the progression of visual loss in some people (Boyd, 2016; 
NIH, 2015a). For the wet type medications that slow the growth 
of abnormal blood vessels, and surgery, such as laser treatment to 
destroy the abnormal blood vessels may be used. Only 25% of those 
with the wet version may see improvement with these procedures 
(Boyd, 2016). 

A third vision problem that increases with age is glaucoma, which 
is the loss of peripheral vision, frequently due to a buildup of fluid in 
the eye that damages the optic nerve. As you age the pressure in the 
eye may increase causing damage to the optic nerve. The exterior 
of the optic nerve receives input from retinal cells on the periphery, 


and as glaucoma progresses more and more of the peripheral visual 
field deteriorates toward the central field of vision. In the advanced 
stages of glaucoma, a person can lose their sight. Fortunately, 
glaucoma tends to progress slowly (NEI, 2016b). Glaucoma is the 
most common cause of blindness in the U.S. (NEI, 2016b). African 
Americans over age 40 and everyone else over age 60 has a higher 
risk for glaucoma. 

Those with diabetes, and with a family history of glaucoma also have 
a higher risk (Owsley et al., 2015). There is no cure for glaucoma, but 
its rate of progression can be slowed, especially with early diagnosis. 
Routine eye exams to measure eye pressure and examination of 
the optic nerve can detect both the risk and presence of glaucoma 
(NEI, 2016b). Those with elevated eye pressure are given medicated 
eye drops. Reducing eye pressure lowers the risk of developing 
glaucoma or slow its progression in those who already have it. 

Hearing: As you read in Chapter 8, our hearing declines both in 


terms of the frequencies of sound we can detect, and the intensity 
of sound needed to hear as we age. These changes continue in late 
adulthood. Almost 1 in 4 adults aged 65 to 74 and 1 in 2 aged 75 and 
older have disabling hearing loss (NIH, 2016). Table 9.4 lists some 
common signs of hearing loss. 

Presbycusis is a common form of hearing loss in late adulthood that 
results in a gradual loss of hearing. It runs in families and affects 
hearing in both ears (NIA, 2015c). Older adults may also notice 
tinnitus, a ringing, hissing, or roaring sound in the ears. The exact 
cause of tinnitus is unknown, although it can be related to 
hypertension and allergies. It may come and go or persist and get 
worse over time (NIA, 2015c). The incidence of both presbycusis 
and tinnitus increase with age and males have higher rates of both 


around the world (McCormak, Edmondson-Jones, Somerset, & Hall, 
2016). 

Your auditory system has two jobs: To help you to hear, and to 
help you maintain balance. Your balance is controlled by the brain 
receiving information from the shifting of hair cells in the inner 
ear about the position and orientation of the body. With age this 
function of the inner ear declines which can lead to problems with 
balance when sitting, standing, or moving (Martin, 2014). 

Taste 
and Smell: Our sense of taste and smell are part of our 
chemical sensing system. Our sense of taste, or gustation, appears 
to age well. Normal taste occurs when molecules that are released 
by chewing food stimulate taste buds along with the tongue, the 
roof of the mouth, and in the lining of the throat. These cells send 
messages to the brain, where specific tastes are identified. After age 
50 we start to lose some of these sensory cells. Most people do 
not notice any changes in taste until one’s 60s (NIH: Senior Health, 
2016b). Given that the loss of taste buds is very gradual, even in late 
adulthood, many people are often surprised that their loss of taste 
is most likely the result of a loss of smell. 

Our sense of smell, or olfaction, decreases more with age, and 
problems with the sense of smell are more common in men than in 
women. Almost 1 in 4 males in their 60s have a disorder with the 
sense of smell, while only 1 in 10 women do (NIH: Senior Health, 
2016b). This loss of smell due to aging is called presbyopia. Olfactory 


cells are located in a small area high in the nasal cavity. These cells 
are stimulated by two pathways; when we inhale through the nose, 
or via the connection between the nose and the throat when we 
chew and digest food. It is a problem with this second pathway that 
explains why some foods such as chocolate or coffee seem tasteless 
when we have a head cold. There are several types of loss of smell. 
Total loss of smell, or anosmia, is extremely rare. 

Problems with our chemical senses can be linked to other serious 
medical conditions such as Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, or multiple 
sclerosis (NIH: Senior Health, 2016a). Any sudden change should be 
checked out. Loss of smell can change a person’s diet, with either a 
loss of enjoyment of food and eating too little for balanced nutrition 
or adding sugar and salt to foods that are becoming blander to the 
palette. 

Touch: Research has found that with age, people may experience 
reduced or changed sensations of vibration, cold, heat, pressure, or 
pain (Martin, 2014). Many of these changes are also aligned with a 
number of medical conditions that are more common among the 
elderly, such as diabetes. However, there are changes in the touch 
sensations among healthy older adults. The ability to detect changes 
in pressure have been shown to decline with age, with it being 
more pronounced by the 6th decade and diminishing further with 
advanced age (Bowden & McNelty, 2013). Yet, there is considerable 
variability, with almost 40% showing sensitivity that is comparable 
to younger adults (Thornbury & Mistretta, 1981). However, the ability 
to detect the roughness/smoothness or hardness/softness of an 
object shows no appreciable change with age (Bowden & McNulty, 
2013). Those who show increasing insensitivity to pressure, 
temperature, or pain are at risk for injury (Martin, 2014). 

Pain: According to Molton and Terrill (2014), approximately 
60%-75% of people over the age of 65 reports at least some chronic 
pain, and this rate is even higher for those individuals living in 
nursing homes. Although the presence of pain increases with age, 
older adults are less sensitive to pain than younger adults (Harkins, 
Price, & Martinelli, 1986). Farrell (2012) looked at research studies 


that included neuroimaging techniques involving older people who 
were healthy and those who experienced a painful disorder. Results 
indicated that there were age-related decreases in brain volume 
in those structures involved in pain. Especially noteworthy were 
changed in the prefrontal cortex, brainstem, and hippocampus. 
Women are more likely to identify feeling pain than men (Tsang 
et al., 2008). Women have fewer opioid receptors in the brain, and 
women also receive less relief from opiate drugs (Garrett, 2015). 

Because pain serves as an important indicator that there is 
something wrong, a decreased sensitivity to pain in older adults 
is a concern because it can conceal illnesses or injuries requiring 
medical attention. 

Chronic health problems, including arthritis, cancer, diabetes, 
joint pain, sciatica, and shingles are responsible for most of the 
pain felt by older adults (Molton & Terrill, 2014). Cancer is a special 
concern, especially “breakthrough pain” which is a severe pain that 
comes on quickly while a patient is already medicated with a long-
acting painkiller. It can be very upsetting, and after one attack 
many people worry it will happen again. Some older individuals 
worry about developing an addiction to pain medication, but if the 


medicine is taken exactly as prescribed, addiction should not be 
a concern (NIH, 2015b). Lastly, side effects from pain medicine 
including constipation, dry mouth, and drowsiness may occur that 
can adversely affect the elder’s life. 

Some older individuals put off going to the doctor because they 
think pain is just part of aging and nothing can help. Of course, this 
is not true. Managing pain is crucial to ensure feelings of well-being 
for older adults. When chronic pain is not managed, the individual 
will restrict their movements for fear of feeling pain or injuring 
themselves further. This lack of activity will result in more 
restrictions, further decreased participation, and greater disability 
(Jensen, Moore, Bockow, Ehde, & Engel, 2011). A decline in physical 
activity because of pain is also associated with weight gain and 
obesity in adults (Strine, Hootman, Chapman, Okoro, & Balluz, 
2005). Additionally, sleep and mood disorders, such as depression, 
can also occur (Moton & Terrill, 2014). Learning to cope effectively 
with pain is an important consideration in late adulthood and 
working with one’s primary physician or a pain specialist is 
recommended (NIH, 2015b). 

For those 65 and older, 35% have a disability of some type. Figure 
9.19 identifies the percentage of those who have a disability based 
on the type. 


Nutrition 

A healthy diet is necessary for older adults to increase mental 
acuteness, resistance to illness and disease, boost energy levels, 
improve immune system strength, recuperation speed, and have 
greater effectiveness in the management of chronic health 
problems (Mayer, 2016). The new MyPlate for Older Adults, a website 
from Tufts University, suggests that older adults should strive for 
50% of their diet is fruits and vegetables; 25% grains, many of 
which should be whole grains; and 25% protein-rich foods, such as 
nuts, beans, fish, lean meat, poultry, and fat-free and low-fat dairy 
products such as milk, cheeses, and yogurts. Unfortunately, changes 
in sensory functions, such as smell and taste, along with loss of 
teeth, can derail an older adult’s ability to eat right. 


Older adults are likely to use salt and sugar to flavor foods that no 
longer taste the way they once did. Several government websites 
provide older adults with alternatives to the salt shaker to make 
foods more palatable. 

Chronic Conditions 

Chronic illnesses are illnesses that are ongoing, generally incurable 
conditions that require continuous medical attention and affect daily 
life. As individuals live longer, diseases that affect older individuals 
will become more prevalent, and the burden of chronic illness grows 
with age. Less than 50% of adults 50-64 have a chronic condition, 
90% aged 75 and up do (Cohen, 2011). Almost 80% have at least 
one chronic disease, and 77% have at least two (National Council 
on Aging, 2019). Older women are more likely to have a chronic 
condition than are older men (83% vs. 88%) (CDC, 2009). Table 
9.6 lists the percentage of older adults who have certain chronic 
illnesses based on the National Health Survey conducted in 2014. 
Other studies place the figure of diabetes in older adults at 26% 
(CDC, 2014). 


Cancer and Major Cardiovascular Disease: As discussed in chapter 
8, cancer and cardiovascular disease are the overall leading causes 
of death, and they are especially high reasons for death in middle 
and late adults. Table 9.7 identifies the percentages of deaths due to 
cancer and cardiovascular disease for selected age groups in 2016; 
the most recent year for data (Heron, 2018). 

Cancer: Advancing age is a significant risk factor for cancer, with 
persons over 65 accounting for 60% of newly diagnosed cancer and 
70% of all cancer deaths (Berger et al., 2006). Additionally, more 
than 70% of the mortality associated including prostate, bladder, 
colon, uterus, pancreas, stomach, rectum and lung occurs in 
patients 65 and older. Other conditions that affect the elderly can 
occur with cancer, including anemia, coronary artery diseases, 
congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, 
renal insufficiency, cerebrovascular diseases, neurovascular 
complications of diabetes mellitus, and arthritis that restricts 
mobility (Balducci & Extermann, 2000). Comorbidity will complicate 
treatment. 


Balducci and Extermann (2000) examined several concerns about 
cancer treatment in the elderly. With aging, there is a decline in 
multiple organ systems that can adversely affect the ability of 
medications to treat cancer. Chemotherapy has been found to 
compromise the cognitive function of those being treated for 
cancer, and it may further exacerbate dementia and elderly 
cognitive declines. Frail individuals, defined as having limited life 
expectancy and near-to- exhausted functional reserves, are also 
not considered candidates for more toxic forms of chemotherapy. 
With cancer, the prevalence and risk of malnutrition are higher 
and diminished visual and hearing function makes elderly cancer 
patients more susceptible to environmental injury. Screening for 
depression is also recommended because depression is associated 
with weight loss, failure to thrive, and may reduce the motivation 
to receive treatment. Consequently, depression has been associated 
with decreased survival rates in the elderly. Due to the projected 
increase in the total number of older patients with cancer, it is 
recommended that physicians and caretakers have expertise in both 
oncology and geriatrics (Berger et al., 2006). 

Heart Disease: There are changes to the heart that happen with 
age, and some may increase a person’s risk of heart disease. These 
include stiffening blood vessels and valves, which may result in 
leaks or problems pumping blood out of the heart (NIA, 2012). As 


previously stated, heart disease is the leading cause of death for 
those in late adulthood (CDC, 2016b). There are different types of 
heart disease, and as already discussed in chapter 8, the most 
common is atherosclerosis, the buildup of fatty deposits or plaques 
in the walls of arteries. As plaque builds up, blood is unable to flow 
normally and bring oxygen throughout the body, including to the 
heart. Depending on where the buildup is, atherosclerosis can cause 
a heart attack, leg pain, or a stroke. However, Atherosclerosis is not 
part of normal aging. 
Many of the problems older people have with 
their heart and blood vessels are caused by disease and not by aging. 
For example, an older heart can normally pump blood as strong as a 
younger heart, while less ability to pump blood is caused by disease. 
Therefore, leading a heart-healthy lifestyle is most important to 
keeping one’s heart strong in late adulthood. 

Arthritis: Arthritis and other rheumatic conditions are the most 
common cause of disability among US adults and have been the 
most common cause of disability among US adults for the past 15 
years (NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and 
Skin Diseases, 2014). According to the NIH, approximately 62% of 
adults with arthritis are 65 years old and up. Almost 1 in 2 older 
adults with arthritis have some degree of mobility limitations, such 
as climbing stairs, walking, and grasping objects. The pain and other 
limitations of arthritis can also increase the risk of depression and 
other forms of mental distress. Osteoarthritis is the most common 
type of arthritis. “When the cartilage, the slick, cushioning surface 
on the ends of bones wears away, bone rubs against bone, causing 
pain, swelling, and stiffness. Over time, joints can lose strength 
and pain may become chronic” (Arthritis Foundation, 2017, para 3). 
Common risk factors for osteoarthritis include genetics, obesity, 
age, previous injury, and other medical conditions. 

Osteoporosis and Kyphosis: Osteoporosis is a disease that thins 
and weakens bones to the point that they become fragile and break 
easily. After age 50, 1 in 2 women and 1 in 4 men will experience 
an osteoporosis-related fracture in their lifetime, often leading to 


hip, spine, and wrist fractures (Dailey & Cravedi, 2006). Broken hips 
are a very serious problem as we age. They greatly increase the risk 
of death, especially during the year after they break (NIH Senior 
Health, 2015). In the U.S., more than 53 million adults either already 
have osteoporosis or at high risk due to low bone mass (NIH Senior 
Health, 2015). As bones weaken in the spine, adults gradually lose 
height and their posture becomes hunched over, which is calledKyphosis. Over time a bent spine can make it hard to walk or even 
sit up. Adults can prevent the loss of bone mass by eating a healthy 
diet with enough calcium and vitamin D, regularly exercising, 
limiting alcohol, and not smoking (National Osteoporosis 
Foundation, 2016). 

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive 
lung disease in which the airways become damaged making it difficult 
to breathe. COPD includes problems such as emphysema and 
chronic bronchitis (NIH Senior Health, 2013). COPD kills more than 
120,000 people every year, making it one of the leading causes 
of death. COPD was once considered a “man’s disease”. However, 


since 2000, 58% of those with COPD are women and they comprise 
8% of all women (American Lung Association, 2019). Research has 
indicated that women may be more susceptible to the effects of 
cigarette smoke due to having smaller lungs and estrogen 
worsening the effects. 

Figure 9.22 compares healthy to damaged lungs due to COPD. As 
COPD develops slowly, people may not notice the early signs and 
may attribute the shortness of breath to age or lack of physical 
exercise. Most people are not diagnosed until midlife or late 
adulthood. There is no cure as the damage cannot be reversed. 
Treatments aim at slowing further damage. Cigarette smoking is the 
leading cause of COPD, but other types of tobacco smoking, such as 
a pipe or cigar, can cause COPD, especially if the smoke is inhaled. 


Heavy or long-term exposure to second-hand smoke can also lead 
to COPD (NIH Senior Health, 2013). COPD can also occur in people 
who have long term exposure to other environmental irritants, such 
as chemical fumes, and dust from the environment and workplace. 

About 1 in every 1,600 to 5,000 people have a risk for COPD 
because of a recessive genetic condition known as alpha-1 
antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency (NIH, 2011). 
AAT is a protein made in 
the liver that protects organs, especially the lungs, from the effects 
of other harmful proteins. In those with the genetic defect, the 
AAT protein created is the wrong shape and cannot leave the liver. 
This can lead to a heightened risk for lung disease, and even liver 
disease, as the excess of the AAT protein can lead to cirrhosis, 
which is a disease in which the liver becomes scarred and does not 
function properly. While some people with ATT deficiency are not 
affected and live a normal life, COPD is more likely to occur in such 
individuals if their lungs are exposed to environmental irritants. 

Shingles: According to the National Institute on Aging (2015e), 
the shingle is a disease that affects your nerves. Shingles are caused 
by the same virus as chickenpox, the varicella-zoster virus (VZV). 
After you recover from chickenpox, the virus continues to live in 
some of your nerve cells. It is usually inactive, and most adults 
live with VZV in their bodies and never get shingles. However, the 
virus will become active in one in three adults. Instead of causing 
chickenpox again, it produces shingles. A risk factor for shingles 
includes advanced age as people have a harder time fighting off 
infections as they get older. About half of all shingles cases are in 
adults age 60 or older, and the chance of getting shingles becomes 
much greater by age 70. Other factors that weaken an individual’s 
ability to fight infections, such as cancer, HIV infections, or other 
medical conditions, can put one at a greater risk for developing 
shingles. 


Shingles result in pain, burning, tingling, or itching in the affected 
area, as well as a rash and blisters. Typically, shingles develop only 
on one side of the body or face and in a small area rather than all 
over. Most cases of shingles last 3 to 5 weeks. After the shingles 
rash goes away, some people may be left with ongoing pain, called 
post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN) in the area where the rash had been 
(NIA, 2015e). The older one is when getting shingles, the greater 
the chance of developing PHN. Some people with PHN find it hard 
to go about their daily activities, like dressing, cooking and eating. 
They can also suffer from depression, anxiety, and sleeplessness. 
Medicines can help with pain and usually, PHN will disappear. 
Unfortunately, the blisters from shingles may become infected or 
leave a scar. Blisters near or in the eye can cause lasting eye damage 
or blindness. A brief paralysis of the face, hearing loss, and very 
rarely, swelling of the brain (encephalitis) can also occur. There is a 
shingles vaccine that is recommended for those aged 50 and older. 
Shingles are not contagious, but one can catch chickenpox from 
someone with shingles. 

Beliefs about Health: Despite the fact that the majority of older 
adults have at least one chronic illness, most rate their overall health 
positively (Graham, 2019). Based on the results of the CDC’s 2017 


National Health Interview Survey, 82% of those aged 65-74 and 73% 
of those 75 and older rated their health as excellent, very good or 
good. Because older adults focus more on emotional well-being, 
positive social relationships, remaining active, and overall life 
satisfaction, poor physical functioning is not considered as 
important. Older adults often look to those who are worse off than 
themselves, including those having died or are in a nursing home, 
and consequently feel more positive about themselves. This 
perspective is in contrast to those younger who believe that there 
should not be anything wrong with them, and consequently 
experience negative feelings when they have an illness. Older adults 
expect there will be some deterioration in their health and are able 
to adapt to it. Similarly, most older adults identify positive mental 
health in conjunction with their physical health. 

Brain Functioning 


Research has demonstrated that the brain loses 5% to 10% of its 
weight between 20 and 90 years of age (Fjell & Walhovd, 2010). This 
decrease in brain volume appears to be due to the shrinkage of 
neurons, lower number of synapses, and shorter length of axons. 
According to Garrett (2015), the normal decline in cognitive ability 
throughout the lifespan has been associated with brain changes, 
including the reduced activity of genes involved in memory storage, 
synaptic pruning, plasticity, and glutamate and GABA 
(neurotransmitters) receptors. There is also a loss in white matter 
connections between brain areas. Without myelin, neurons 
demonstrate slower conduction and impede each other’s actions. 
A loss of synapses occurs in specific brain areas, including the 
hippocampus (involved in memory) and the basal forebrain region. 
Older individuals also activate larger regions of their attentional and 
executive networks, located in the parietal and prefrontal cortex, 
when they perform complex tasks. This increased activation 


correlates with reduced performance on both executive tasks and 
tests of working memory when compared to those younger (Kolb & 
Whishaw, 2011). 

Continued Neurogenesis: Researchers at the University of Chicago 
found that new neurons continued to form into old age. Tobin et 
al. (2019) examined the post-mortem brain tissue of individuals 
between the ages of 79 and 99 (average age 90.6) and found 
evidence of neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Approximately 2000 
neural progenitor cells and 150, 000 developing neurons were found 
per brain, although the number of developing neurons was lower 
in people with cognitive impairments or Alzheimer’s disease. Tobin 
et al. hypothesized that the lower levels of neurogenesis in the 
hippocampus were associated with symptoms of cognitive decline 
and reduced synaptic plasticity. 

The brain in late adulthood also exhibits considerable plasticity, 
and through practice and training, the brain can be modified to 
compensate for any age-related changes (Erber & Szuchman, 2015). 
Park and Reuter-Lorenz (2009) proposed the Scaffolding Theory of 
Aging and Cognition which states that the brain adapts to neural 
atrophy (dying of brain cells) by building alternative connections, 
referred to as scaffolding. This scaffolding allows older brains to 
retain high levels of performance. Brain compensation is especially 
noted in the additional neural effort demonstrated by those 
individuals who are aging well. For example, older adults who 
performed just as well as younger adults on a memory task used 
both prefrontal areas, while only the right prefrontal cortex was 
used in younger participants (Cabeza, Anderson, Locantore, & 
McIntosh, 2002). Consequently, this decrease in brain lateralization 
appears to assist older adults with their cognitive skills. 

Healthy Brain Functioning: Cheng (2016) found that physical 
activity and stimulating cognitive activity resulted in significant 
reductions in the risk of neurocognitive disorders in longitudinal 
studies. Physical activity, especially aerobic exercise, is associated 
with less age-related gray and white matter loss, as well and 


diminished neurotoxins in the brain. Overall, physical activity 
preserves the integrity of neurons and brain volume. Cognitive 
training improves the efficiency of the prefrontal cortex and 
executive functions, such as working memory, and strengthens the 
plasticity of neural circuits. Both activities support cognitive 
reserve, or “the structural and dynamic capacities of the brain that 
buffer against atrophies and lesions” (p. 85). Although it is optimal to 
begin physical and cognitive activities earlier in life, it is not too late 
to start these programs in late adulthood to improve one’s cognitive 
health. 

Can we improve brain functioning? Many training programs have 
been created to improve brain functioning. ACTIVE (Advanced 
Cognitive Training for Independent and Vital Elderly), a study 
conducted between 1999 and 2001 in which 2,802 individuals age 
65 to 94, suggests that the answer is “yes”. These racially diverse 
participants received 10 group training sessions and 4 follow up 
sessions to work on tasks of memory, reasoning, and speed of 


processing. These mental workouts improved cognitive functioning 
even 5 years later. Many of the participants believed that this 
improvement could be seen in everyday tasks as well (Tennstedt et 
al., 2006). However, programs for the elderly on memory, reading, 
and processing speed training demonstrate that there is an 
improvement in the specific tasks trained, but there is no 
generalization to other abilities (Jarrett, 2015). Further, these 
programs have not been shown to delay or slow the progression 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Although these programs are not harmful, 
“physical exercise, learning new skills, and socializing remain the 
most effective ways to train your brain” (p. 207). These activities 
appear to build a reserve to minimize the effects of primary aging of 
the brain. 

Parkinson’s disease is characterized by motor tremors, loss of 
balance, poor coordination, rigidity, and difficulty moving (Garrett, 
2015). Parkinson’s affects approximately 1% of those over the age 
of 60, and it appears more frequently in family members in a little 
less than 10% of cases. Twenty-eight chromosomal areas have been 
implicated in Parkinson’s disease, but environmental factors have 
also been identified and include brain injury. Being knocked 
unconscious once increases the risk by 32% and being knocked 
out several times increases the risk by 174% (Garrett, 2015). Other 
environmental influences include toxins, industrial chemicals, 
carbon monoxide, herbicides and pesticides (Olanow & Tatton, 
1999). The symptoms are due to the deterioration of the substantia 
nigra, an area in the midbrain whose neurons send dopamine-
releasing axons to the basal ganglia which affect motor activity. 
Treatment typically includes the medication levodopa (L-dopa), 
which crosses the blood-brain barrier and is converted into 
dopamine in the brain. Deep brain stimulation, which involves 
inserting an electrode into the brain that provides electrical 
stimulation, has resulted in improved motor functioning (Garrett, 
2015). 


Sleep 

Similar to other adults, older adults need between 7 to 9 hours of 
sleep per night, but they tend to go to sleep earlier and get up earlier 
than those younger. This pattern is called advanced sleep phase 
syndrome and is based on changes in circadian rhythms (National 
Sleep Foundation, 2009). There are sleep problems in older adults, 
and insomnia is the most common problem in those 60 and older 
(NIA, 2016). People with insomnia have trouble falling asleep and 
staying asleep. There are many reasons why older people may have 
insomnia, including certain medications, being in pain, having a 
medical or psychiatric condition, and even worrying before bedtime 
about not being able to sleep. Using over the counter sleep aids 
or medication may only work when used for a short time. 
Consequently, sleep problems should be discussed with a health 
care professional. 

Also, common in older adults are sleep disorders, including sleep 
apnea, restless legs syndrome, periodic limb movement disorder, 
and rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (NIA, 2016). Sleep 
apnea refers to repeated short pauses in breathing, while an 
individual sleeps, which can lead to reduced oxygen in the blood. 
Snoring is a common symptom of sleep apnea and it often worsens 
with age. Untreated sleep apnea can lead to impaired daytime 
functioning, high blood pressure, headaches, stroke, and memory 
loss. Restless legs syndrome feels like there is tingling, crawling, or 
pins and needles in one or both legs, and this feeling is worse at night. 

Periodic limb movement disorder causes people to jerk and kick 
their legs every 20 to 40 seconds during sleep. Rapid eye movement 
sleep behavior disorder occurs when one’s muscles can move during 
REM sleep and sleep is disrupted. 

According to the National Sleep Foundation (2009), there are many 
medical conditions that affect sleep and include gastroesophageal 
reflux disease, diabetes mellitus, renal failure, respiratory diseases 
such as asthma, and immune disorders. Diseases such as Parkinson’s 


disease and multiple sclerosis also commonly cause problems 
sleeping. Lastly, Alzheimer’s disease can interfere with sleeping 
patterns. Individuals may wake up many times during the night, 
wander when up, and yell which can alter the amount of time they 
sleep. Both minor and major sleep problems in older adults can 
lead to increased risk of accidents, falls, chronic fatigue, decreased 
quality of life, cognitive decline, reduced immune function, and 
depression (Buman, 2013). 

Sexuality 

Because of sleep problems experienced by those in late adulthood, 
research has looked into whether exercise can improve their quality 
of sleep. Results show that 150 minutes per week of exercise can 
improve sleep quality (Buman, 2013). This amount of exercise is also 
recommended to improve other health areas including lowering the 
risk for heart disease, diabetes, and some cancers. Aerobic activity, 
weight training, and balance programs are all recommended. For 
those who live in assisted living facilities even light exercise, such 
as stretching and short walks, can improve sleep. High-intensity 


activity is not necessary to see improvements. Overall, the effects of 
exercise on sleep may actually be even larger for older adults since 
their sleep quality may not be ideal to start. 

According to Kane (2008), older men and women are often viewed 
as genderless and asexual. There is a stereotype that elderly 
individuals no longer engage in sexual activity and when they do, 
they are perceived to have committed some kind of offense. These 
ageist myths can become internalized, and older people have a more 
difficult time accepting their sexuality (Gosney, 2011). Additionally, 
some older women indicate that they no longer worry about sexual 
concerns anymore once they are past the childbearing years. 

In reality, many older couples find greater satisfaction in their 
sex life than they did when they were younger. They have fewer 
distractions, more time and privacy, no worries about getting 
pregnant, and greater intimacy with a lifelong partner (NIA, 2013). 
Results from the National Social Life Health, and Aging Project 
indicated that 72% of men and 45.5% of women aged 52 to 72 
reported being sexually active (Karraker, DeLamater, & Schwarz, 
2011). Additionally, the National Survey of Sexual Health data 
indicated that 20%-30% of individuals remain sexually active well 
into their 80s (Schick et al., 2010). However, there are issues that 


occur in older adults that can adversely affect their enjoyment of 
healthy sexual relationships. 

Causes of Sexual Problems: According to the National Institute 
on Aging (2013), chronic illnesses including arthritis (joint pain), 
diabetes (erectile dysfunction), heart disease (difficulty achieving 
orgasm for both sexes), stroke (paralysis), and dementia 
(inappropriate sexual behavior) can all adversely affect sexual 
functioning. Hormonal changes, physical disabilities, surgeries, and 
medicines can also affect a senior’s ability to participate in and 
enjoy sex. How one feels about sex can also affect performance. For 
example, a woman who is unhappy about her appearance as she 
ages may think her partner will no longer find her attractive. A focus 
on youthful physical beauty for women may get in the way of her 
enjoyment of sex. Likewise, most men have a problem with erectile 
dysfunction (ED) once in a while, and some may fear that ED will 
become a more common problem as they age. If there is a decline 
in sexual activity for a heterosexual couple, it is typically due to a 
decline in the male’s physical health (Erber & Szuchman, 2015). 

Overall, the best way to experience a healthy sex life in later life is 
to keep sexually active while aging. However, the lack of an available 
partner can affect heterosexual women’s participation in a sexual 
relationship. Beginning at age 40 there are more women than men 
in the population, and the ratio becomes 2 to 1 at age 85 (Karraker 
et al., 2011). Because older men tend to pair with younger women 
when they become widowed or divorced, this also decreases the 
pool of available men for older women (Erber & Szuchman, 2015). In 
fact, a change in marital status does not result in a decline in the 
sexual behavior of men aged 57 to 85 years old, but it does result in 
a decline for similar-aged women (Karraker et al., 2011). 

Concluding Thoughts: Key players in improving the quality of life 
among older adults will be those adults themselves. By exercising, 
reducing stress, stopping smoking, limiting the use of alcohol, and 
consuming more fruits and vegetables, older adults can expect to 
live longer and more active lives (He et al., 2005). Stress reduction, 


both in late adulthood and earlier in life, is also crucial. The 
reduction of societal stressors can promote active life expectancy. 
In the last 40 years, smoking rates have decreased, but obesity has 
increased, and physical activity has only modestly increased. 

References 

Acierno, R., Hernandez, M. A., Amstadter, A. B., Resnick, H. S., Steve, 
K., Muzzy, W., & Kilpatrick, D. G. (2010). Prevalence and correlates 
of emotional, physical, sexual, and financial abuse and potential 
neglect in the United States: The National Elder Mistreatment 
Study. American Journal of Public Health, 100, 292-297. 

Administration on Aging. (2017). 2017 Profile of older Americans. 
Retrieved from: https://acl.gov/sites/default/files/
Aging%20and%20Disability%20in%20America/
2017OlderAmericansProfile.pdf 

Alleccia, J., & Bailey, M. (2019, June 12). A concern for LGBT boomers. 
The Chicago Tribune, pp. 1-2. 

Alterovitz, S. S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2011). Partner preferences 
across the lifespan: Online dating by older adults. Psychology of 
Popular Media Culture, 1, 89-95. 

Alzheimer’s Association. (2016). Know the 10 signs. Early detection 
matters. Retrieved from: http://www.alz.org/national/
documents/tenwarnsigns.pdf 

American Federation of Aging Research. (2011). Theories of aging.
Retrieved from http://www.afar.org/docs/migrated/
111121_INFOAGING_GUIDE_THEORIES_OF_AGINGFR.pdf 

American Heart Association. (2014). Overweight in children. 
Retrieved from http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/


HealthyLiving/HealthyKids/ChildhoodObesity/Overweight-in- 
Children_UCM_304054_Article.jsp#.V5EIlPkrLIU 

American Lung Association. (2018). Taking her breath away: The 
rise of COPD in women. Retrieved from https://www.lung.org/
assets/documents/research/rise-of-copd-in-women-full.pdf 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. 

American Psychological Association. (2016). Older adults’ health and 
age-related changes. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/pi/
aging/resources/guides/older.aspx 

Andrés, P., Van der Linden, M., & Parmentier, F. B. R. (2004). Directed 
forgetting in working memory: Age-related differences. Memory, 
12, 248-256. 

Antonucci, T. C. (2001). Social relations: An examination of social 
networks, social support and sense of control. In J.E. Birren & K. 
W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging (5th ed., pp. 
427–453). New York: Academic Press. 

Arias, E., & Xu, J. (2019). United States life tables, 2017. National Vital 
Statistics Reports, 68(7), 1-66. 

Arthritis Foundation. (2017). What is arthritis? Retrieved from 
http://www.arthritis.org/about-arthritis/understanding- 
arthritis/what-is-arthritis.php 

Ash, A. S., Kroll-Desroisers, A. R., Hoaglin, D. C., Christensen, K., 
Fang, H., & Perls, T. T. (2015). Are members of long-lived families 
healthier than their equally long-lived peers? Evidence from the 
long life family study. Journal of Gerontology: Series A: Biological 
Sciences and Medical Sciences. Advance online publication. 
doi:10.1093/gerona/glv015 

Atchley, R. C. (1994). Social forces and aging (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth. 

Balducci, L., & Extermann, M. (2000). Management of cancer if the 
older person: A practical approach. The Oncologist. Retrieved 


from http://theoncologist.alphamedpress.org/content/5/3/
224.full 

Baltes, B. B., & Dickson, M. W. (2001). Using life-span models in 
industrial/organizational psychology: The theory of selective 
optimization with compensation (soc). Applied Developmental 
Science, 5, 51-62. 

Baltes, P. B. (1993). The aging mind: Potential and limits. The 
Gerontologist, 33, 580-594. 

Baltes, P.B. & Kunzmann, U. (2004). The two faces of wisdom: 
Wisdom as a general theory of knowledge and judgment about 
excellence in mind and virtue vs. wisdom as everyday realization 
in people and products. Human Development, 47(5), 290-299. 

Baltes, P. B. & Lindenberger, U. (1997). Emergence of powerful 
connection between sensory and cognitive functions across the 
adult life span: A new window to the study of cognitive aging? 
Psychology and Aging, 12, 12–21. 

Baltes, P. B., & Staudinger, U. M. (2000). Wisdom: A metaheuristic 
(pragmatic) to orchestrate mind and virtue toward excellence. 
American Psychologist, 55 (1), 122-136. 

Barker, (2016). Psychology for nursing and healthcare professionals. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Barnes, S. F. (2011a). Fourth age-the final years of adulthood. San 
Diego State University Interwork Institute. Retrieved from 
http://calbooming.sdsu.edu/documents/TheFourthAge.pdf 

Barnes, S. F. (2011b). Third age-the golden years of adulthood. San 
Diego State University Interwork Institute. Retrieved from 
http://calbooming.sdsu.edu/documents/TheThirdAge.pdf 

Bartlett, Z. (2014). The Hayflick limit. Embryo Project Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved from http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8237 

Bennett, K. M., Hughes, G. M., & Smith, P. T. (2005). Psychological 
response to later life widowhood: Coping and the effects of 
gender. Omega, 51, 33-52. 

Benson, J.J., & Coleman, M. (2016). Older adults developing a 
preference for living apart together. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 18, 797-812. 


Berger, N. A., Savvides, P., Koroukian, S. M., Kahana, E. F., Deimling, 
G. T., Rose, J. H., Bowman, K. F., & Miller, R. H. (2006). Cancer 
in the elderly. Transactions of the American Clinical and 
Climatological Association, 117, 147-156. 

Berk, L. (2007). Development through the life span (4th ed.). Boston: 
Allyn and Bacon. 

Blanchard-Fields, F. (2007). Everyday problem solving and emotion: 
An adult development perspective. Current Directions in 
Psychoogical Science, 16, 26–31 

Blank, T. O. (2005). Gay men and prostate cancer: Invisible diversity. 
American Society of Clinical Oncology, 23, 2593–2596. doi:10.1200/ 
JCO.2005.00.968 

Blazer, D. G., & Wu, L. (2009). The epidemiology of substance use 
and disorders among middle aged and elderly community adults: 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health. American Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 17, 237-245. 

Bookwala, J., Marshall, K. I., & Manning, S. W. (2014). Who needs a 
friend? Marital status transitions and physical health outcomes in 
later life. Health Psychology, 33(6), 505-515. 

Borysławski, K., & Chmielewski, P. (2012). A prescription for healthy 
aging. In: A Kobylarek (Ed.), Aging: Psychological, biological and 
social dimensions (pp. 33-40). Wrocław: Agencja Wydawnicza. 

Botwinick, J. (1984). Aging and behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Springer. 

Bowden, J. L., & McNulty, P. A. (2013). Age-related changes in 
cutaneous sensation in the healthy human hand. Age (Dordrecht, 
Netherlannds), 35(4), 1077-1089. 

Boyd, K. (2014). What are cataracts? American Academy of 
Ophthalmology. Retrieved from http://www.aao.org/eye- 
health/diseases/what-are-cataracts 

Boyd, K. (2016). What is macular degeneration? American Academy 
of Ophthalmology. Retrieved from http://www.aao.org/eye-
health/diseases/amd-macular-degeneration 

Brehm, S. S., Miller, R., Perlman, D., & Campbell, S. (2002). Intimate 
relationships (3rd ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education. 

Buman, M. P. (2013). Does exercise help sleep in the elderly? 


Retrieved from https://sleepfoundation.org/ask-the-expert/
does-exercise-help-sleep-the-elderly 

Cabeza, R., Anderson, N. D., Locantore, J. K., & McIntosh, A. R. (2002). 
Aging gracefully: Compensatory brain activity in high- performing 
older adults. NeuroImage, 17, 1394-1402. 

Carlson, N. R. (2011). Foundations of behavioral neuroscience (8th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson Education. 

Carr, D. (2004a). The desire to date and remarry among older 
widows and widowers. Journal of Marriage and Family, 66, 1051– 
1068. 

Carr, D. (2004b). Gender, preloss marital dependence, and older 
adults’ adjustment to widowhood. Journal of Marriage and Family, 
66, 220-235. 

Carstensen, L. L. (1993). Motivation for social contact across the 
life span: A theory of socioemotional selectivity. In J. E. Jacobs 
(Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1992: Developmental 
perspectives on motivation (pp. 209–254). Lincoln, NE: University 
of Nebraska Press. 

Carstenson, L. L., Fung, H. H., & Charles, S. T. (2003). Socioemotional 
selectivity theory and the regulation of emotion in the second half 
of life. Motivation and Emotion, 27, 103-123. 

Carstensen, L. L., Gottman, J. M., & Levensen, R. W. (1995). Emotional 
behavior in long-term marriage. Psychology and Aging, 10, 140–149. 

Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowitz, D. M., & Charles, S. T. (1999). Taking 
time seriously: A theory of socioemotional selectivity. American 
Psychologist, 54, 165–181. 

Caruso, C., Accardi, G., Virruso, C., & Candore, G. (2013). Sex, gender 
and immunosenescence: A key to understand the different 
lifespan between men and women? Immunity & Ageing, 10, 20. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2008). Persons age 50 
and over: Centers for disease control and prevention. Atlanta, GA: 
Author. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2009). Percent of U. 
S. adults 55 and over with chronic conditions. Retrieved from 


http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/health_policy/
adult_chronic_conditions.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). Rationale for 
regular reporting on health disparities and inequalities—United 
States. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 60, 3–10. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013). State-Specific 
Healthy Life Expectancy at Age 65 Years — United States, 
2007–2009. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/mm6228a1.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). National 
Diabetes Statistics Report, 2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/national-
diabetes-report-web.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016a). Increase in 
Suicide in the United States, 1999–2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db241.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016b). Older Persons’ 
Health. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/older-
american-health.htm 

Central Intelligence Agency. (2019). The world factbook. Retrieved 
from https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world- 
factbook/fields/355rank.html 

Charness, N. (1981). Search in chess: Age and skill differences. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, 7, 467. 

Cheng, S. (2016). Cognitive reserve and the prevention of dementia: 
The role of physical and cognitive activities. Current Psychiatry 
Reports, 18(9), 85. 

Chmielewski, P., Boryslawski, K., & Strzelec, B. (2016). Contemporary 
views on human aging and longevity. Anthropological Review, 
79(2), 115-142. 

Cohen, D., & Eisdorfer, C. (2011). Integrated textbook of geriatric 
mental health. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Cohen, 
R. M. (2011). Chronic disease: The invisible illness. AARP. Retrieved 


from http://www.aarp.org/health/conditions-treatments/
info-06-2011/chronic-disease-invisible-illness.html 

Cohn, D., & Passel, J. (2018). A record 64 million Americans live in 
multigenerational households. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/05/a-
record-64-million-americans-live-in-multigenerational- 
households/ 

Craik, F. I., & Bialystok, E. (2006). Cognition through the lifespan: 
mechanisms of change. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 131–138. 

Dahlgren, D. J. (1998). Impact of knowledge and age on tip-of-the-
tongue rates. Experimental Aging Research, 24, 139-153. Dailey, S., 
& Cravedi, K. (2006). Osteoporosis information easily accessible 
NIH senior health. National Institute on Aging. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/newsroom/2006/01/osteoporosis-
information-easily-accessible-nihseniorhealth 

David, S., & Knight, B. G. (2008). Stress and coping among gay men: 
Age and ethnic differences. Psychology and Aging, 23, 62– 69. 
doi:10.1037/ 0882-7974.23.1.62 

Davidson, K. (2001). Late life widowhood, selfishness and new 
partnership choices: A gendered perspective. Ageing and Society, 
21, 297–317. 

Department of Defense. (2015). Defense advisory committee on 
women in the services. Retrieved from 
http://dacowits.defense.gov/Portals/48/Documents/Reports/
2015/Annual%20Report/
2015%20DACOWITS%20Annual%20Report_Final.pdf 

de Vries, B. (1996). The understanding of friendship: An adult life 
course perspective. In C. Magai & S. H. McFadden (Eds.), Handbook 
of emotion, adult development, and aging (pp. 249–268). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 

DiGiacomo, R. (2015). Road scholar, once elderhostel, targets boomers. 
Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/nextavenue/
2015/10/05/road-scholar-once-elderhostel-targets-
boomers/#fcb4f5b64449 

Dixon R. A., & Cohen, A. L. (2003). Cognitive development in 


adulthood. In R. M. Lerner, M. A. Easterbrokks & J. Misty (Eds.), 
Handbook of psychology (pp. 443-461). Hoboken NJ: John Wiley. 

Dixon, R. A., Rust, T. B., Feltmate, S. E., & See, S. K. (2007). Memory 
and aging: Selected research directions and application issues. 
Canadian Psychology, 48, 67-76. 

Dollemore, D. (2006, August 29). Publications. National Institute on 
Aging. Retrieved from http://www.nia.nih.gov/
HealthInformation/Publications?AgingUndertheMicroscope/ 

Economic Policy Institute. (2013). Financial security of elderly 
Americans at risk. Retrieved from http://www.epi.org/
publication/economic-security-elderly-americans-risk 

Elwert, F., & Christakis, N. (2008). The effect of widowhood on 
mortality by the causes of death of both spouses. American 
Journal of Public Health, 98, 2092-2098. 

Erber, J. T., & Szuchman, L. T. (2015). Great myths of aging. West 
Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons. Erikson, E. H. (1982). The life cycle 
completed. New York, NY: Norton & Company. 

Farrell, M. J. (2012). Age-related changes in the structure and 
function of brain regions involved in pain processing. Pain 
Medication, 2, S37-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4637.2011.01287.x. 

Federal Bureau of Investigation.üü (2014). Crime in the United States. 
Retrieved from https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the- u.s/2014/
crime-in-the-u.s.-2014/tables/expanded- homicide- data/
expanded_homicide_data_table_1_murder_victims_by_race_
ethnicity_and_sex_2014.xls 

Fingerman, K. L., & Birditt, K. S. (2011). Relationships between adults 
and their aging parents. In K. W. Schaie & S. I Willis (Eds.). 
Handbook of the psychology of aging (7th ed.) (pp 219-232). 
SanDiego: Elsevier Academic Press. 

Fischer, C. S. (1982). To dwell among friends: Personal networks in 
town and city. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Fjell, A. M., & Walhovd, K. B. (2010). Structural brain changes in 
aging: Courses, causes, and cognitive consequences. Reviews in 
the Neurosciences, 21, 187-222. 

Fox, S. (2004). Older Americans and the Internet. PEW Internet & 


American Life Project. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/report_display.asp?r_117 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Kim, H. J., Emlet, C. A., Muraco, A., 
Erosheva, E. A., Hoy-Ellis, C. P.,… Petry, H. (2011). The aging and 
health report: disparities and resilience among lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender older adults. Seattle, WA: Institute for 
Multigenerational Health. 

Garrett, B. (2015). Brain and behavior (4th ed.) Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. 

Gatz, M., Smyer, M. A., & DiGilio, D. A. (2016). Psychology’s 
contribution to the well-being of older Americans. American 
Psychologist, 71(4), 257-267. 

Gems, D. (2014). Evolution of sexually dimorphic longevity in 
humans. Aging, 6, 84-91. 

George, L.K. (2009). Still happy after all these years: research 
frontiers on subjective well-being in later life. Journal of 
Gerontology: Social Sciences, 65B (3), 331–339. doi:10.1093/
geronb/gbq006 

Githens, K., & Abramsohn, E. (2010). Still got it at seventy: Sexuality, 
aging, and HIV. Achieve, 1, 3-5. 

Glaser, K., Stuchbury, R., Tomassini, C., & Askham, J. (2008). The 
long-term consequences of partnership dissolution for support in 
later life in the Unites Kingdom. Ageing & Society, 28(3), 329-351. 

Gosney, T. A. (2011). Sexuality in older age: Essential considerations 
for healthcare professionals. Age Ageing, 40(5), 538-543. Göthe, 
K., Oberauer, K., & Kliegl, R. (2007). Age differences in dual-task 
performance after practice. Psychology and Aging, 22, 596-606. 

Goyer, A. (2010). More grandparents raising grandkids: New census 
data shows and increase in children being raised by extended 
family. AARP. Retrieved from http://www.aarp.org/
relationships/grandparenting/info-12- 2010/
more_grandparents_raising_grandchildren.html 

Graham, J. (2019, July 10). Why many seniors rate their health 
positively. The Chicago Tribune, p. 2. 

Greenfield, E. A., Vaillant, G. E., & Marks, N. F. (2009). Do formal 


religious participation and spiritual perceptions have 
independent linkages with diverse dimensions of psychological 
well-being? Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 50, 196-212. 

Guinness World Records. (2016). Oldest person (ever). Retrieved 
from http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/
search?term=oldest+person+%28ever%29 

Ha, J. H. (2010). The effects of positive and negative support from 
children on widowed older adults’ psychological adjustment: A 
longitudinal analysis. Gerontologist, 50, 471-481. 

Harkins, S. W., Price, D. D. & Martinelli, M. (1986). Effects of age on 
pain perception. Journal of Gerontology, 41, 58-63. 

Harvard School of Public Health. (2016). Antioxidants: Beyond the 
hype. Retrieved from https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/
nutritionsource/antioxidants 

Hasher, L. & Zacks, R. T. (1988). Working memory, comprehension, 
and aging: A review and a new view. In G.H. Bower (Ed.), The 
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, (Vol. 22, pp. 193–225). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press. 

He, W., Goodkind, D., & Kowal, P. (2016). An aging world: 2015. 
International Population Reports. U.S. Census Bureau. 

He, W., Sengupta, M., Velkoff, V., & DeBarros, K. (2005.). U. S. Census 
Bureau, Current Popluation Reports, P23-209, 65+ in the United 
States: 2005 (United States, U. S. Census Bureau). Retrieved from 
http://www.census.gov/prod/1/pop/p23- 190/p23-190.html 

Hendricks, J., & Cutler, S. J. (2004). Volunteerism and socioemotional 
selectivity in later life. Journal of Gerontology, 59B, S251-S257. 

Henry, J. D., MacLeod, M. S., Phillips, L. H., & Crawford, J. R. (2004). 
A meta-analytic review of prospective memory and aging. 
Psychology and Aging, 19, 27–39. 

Heron, M. (2018). Deaths: Leading causes 2016. National Vital 
Statistics Reports, 67(6), 1-77. 

Hillman, J., & Hinrichsen, G. A. (2014). Promoting and affirming 
competent practice with older lesbian and gay adults. Professional 
Psychology: Research and Practice, 45(4), 169-277. 

Hinze, S. W., Lin, J., & Andersson, T. E. (2012). Can we capture the 


intersections? Older black women, education, and health. 
Women’s Health Issues, 22, e91-e98. 

Hirokawa K., Utsuyama M., Hayashi, Y., Kitagawa, M., Makinodan, T., 
& Fulop, T. (2013). Slower immune system aging in women versus 
men in the Japanese population. Immunity & Ageing, 10(1), 19. 

Holland, K. (2014). Why America’s campuses are going gray?
Retrieved from http://www.cnbc.com/2014/08/28/why-
americas- campuses-are-going-gray.html 

Holmes, T. H., & Rahe, R. H. (1967). The social readjustment rating 
scale. Journal of psychosomatic research, 11, 213. 

Holth, J., Fritschi, S., Wang, C., Pedersen, N., Cirrito, J., Mahan, 
T.,…Holtzman, D. 2019). The sleep-wake cycle regulates brain 
interstitial fluid tau in mice and CSF tau in humans. Science, 
363(6429), 880-884. 

Hooyman, N. R., & Kiyak, H. A. (2011). Social gerontology: A 
multidisciplinary perspective (9th Ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson 
James, J. B., Matz-Costa, C., & Smyer, M. A. (2016). Retirement 
security: It’s not just about the money. American Psychologist,
71(4), 334-344. 

Jarrett, C. (2015). Great myths of the brain. West Sussex, UK: John 
Wiley & Sons. 

Jefferies, L. N., Roggeveen, A. B., Ennis, J. T., Bennett, P. J., Sekuler, A. 
B., & Dilollo, V. (2015). On the time course of attentional focusing 
in older adults. Psychological Research, 79, 28-41. 

Jensen, M. P., Moore, M. R., Bockow, T. B., Ehde, D. M., & Engel, J. 
M. (2011). Psychosocial factors and adjustment to persistent pain 
in persons with physical disabilities: A systematic review. Archives 
of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 92, 146–160. doi:10.1016/
j.apmr.2010 .09.021 

Jin, K. (2010). Modern biological theories of aging. Aging and Disease, 
1, 72-74. 

Kahana, E., Bhatta, T., Lovegreen, L. D., Kahana, B., & Midlarsky, 
E. (2013). Altruism, helping, and volunteering: Pathways to well-
being in late life. Journal of Aging and Health, 25(1), 159-187. 

Kahn, R. L., & Antonucci, T. C. (1980). Convoys over the life course: 


Attachment, roles, and social support. In P. B. Baltes & O. G. Brim 
(Eds.), Life-span development and behavior (pp. 253–286). New 
York: Academic Press. 

Kane, M. (2008). How are sexual behaviors of older women and older 
men perceived by human service students? Journal of Social Work 
Education, 27(7), 723-743. 

Karraker, A., DeLamater, J., & Schwartz, C. R. (2011). Sexual frequency 
decline from midlife to later life. The Journal of Gerontology, 
Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66B, 502-512. 

Kaskie, B., Imhof, S., Cavanaugh, J., & Culp, K. (2008). Civic 
engagement as a retirement role for aging Americans. The 
Gerontologist, 48, 368-377. 

Kemp, E. A., & Kemp, J. E. (2002). Older couples: New romances: 
Finding and keeping love in later life. Berkeley, CA: Celestial Arts. 

King, V., & Scott, M. E. (2005). A comparison of cohabitating 
relationships among older and younger adults. Journal of 
Marriage and Family, 67(2), 271-285. 

Kolb, B., & Whishaw, I. Q. (2011). An introduction to brain and 
behavior (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Worth Publishers. 

Kosberg, J. I. (2014). Reconsidering assumptions regarding men an 
elder abuse perpetrators and as elder abuse victims. Journal of 
Elder Abuse and Neglect, 26, 207-222. 

Kowalski, S. D., & Bondmass, M. D. (2008). Physiological and 
psychological symptoms of grief in widows. Research in Nursing 
and Health, 31(1), 23-30. 

Kramer, A. F. & Erickson, K. I. (2007). Capitalizing on cortical 
plasticity: The influence of physical activity on cognition and 
brain function. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 342–348. 

Lang, F. R., & Schütze, Y. (2002). Adult children’s supportive 
behaviors and older adults’ subjective well-being: A 
developmental perspective on intergenerational relationships. 
Journal of Social Issues, 58, 661-680. 

Laslett, P. (1989). A fresh map of life: The emergence of the third age. 
London, UK: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 

Lee, S.B., Oh, J.G., Park, J.H., Choi, S.P., & Wee, J.H. (2018). Differences 


in youngest-old, middle-old, and oldest-old patients who visit 
the emergency department. Clinical and Experimental Emergency 
Medicine, 5(4), 249-255. 

Lee, S. J., Steinman, M., & Tan, E. J. (2011). Volunteering, driving 
status, and mortality in U.S. retirees. Journal of the American 
Geriatric Society, 59 (2), 274-280. doi: 10.1111/
j.1532-5415.2010.03265x 

Lemon, F. R., Bengston, V. L., & Peterson, J. A. (1972). An exploration 
of activity theory of aging: Activity types and life satisfaction 
among in-movers to a retirement community. Journal of 
Geronotology, 27, 511-523. 

Levant, S., Chari, K., & DeFrances, C. J. (2015). Hospitalizations for 
people aged 85 and older in the United States 2000-2010. Centers 
for Disease Control. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
data/databriefs/db182.pdf 

Levy, B. (2009). Stereotype embodiment: A psychosocial approach to 
aging. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18, 332-336. 

Lichtenberg, P. A. (2016). Financial exploitation, financial capacity, 
and Alzheimer’s disease. American Psychologist, 71(4), 312-320. 

Lin, I. F. (2008). Consequences of parental divorce for adult 
children’s support of their frail parents. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 70(1), 113-128. 

Livingston, G. (2019). Americans 60 and older are spending more 
time in front of their screens than a decade ago. Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/06/18/
americans-60-and-older-are-spending-more-time-in-front-of- 
their-screens-than-a-decade-ago/ 

Luo, L., & Craik, F. I. M. (2008). Aging and memory: A cognitive 
approach. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 53, 346-353. Martin, L. 
J. (2014). Age changes in the senses. MedlinePlus. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/004013.htm 

Martin, P., Poon, L.W., & Hagberg, B. (2011). Behavioral factors of 
longevity. Journal of Aging Research, 2011/2012, 1–207. 

Mayer, J. (2016). MyPlate for older adults. Nutrition Resource Center 
on Nutrition and Aging and the U. S. Department of Agriculture 


Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging and Tufts University. 
Retrieved from http://nutritionandaging.org/my-plate-for-
older-adults/ 

McCormak A., Edmondson-Jones M., Somerset S., & Hall D. (2016) 
A systematic review of the reporting of tinnitus prevalence and 
severity. Hearing Research, 337, 70-79. 

McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1988). Physiological resilience among 
widowed men and women: A 10 year follow-up study of a national 
sample. Journal of Social Issues, 44(3), 129-142. 

McDonald, L., & Robb, A. L. (2004). The economic legacy of divorce 
and separation for women in old age. Canadian Journal on Aging, 
23, 83-97. 

McEntarfer, E. (2018). Older people working longer, earning more. 
Retrieved from http://thepinetree.net/new/?p=58015 

Meegan, S. P., & Berg, C. A. (2002). Contexts, functions, forms, and 
processes of collaborative everyday problem solving in older 
adulthood. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 26(1), 
6-15. doi: 10.1080/01650250143000283 

Molton, I. R., & Terrill, A. L. (2014). Overview of persistent pain in 
older adults. American Psychologist, 69(2), 197-207. Natanson, H. 
(2019, July 14). To reduce risk of Alzheimer’s play chess and ditch 
red meat. The Chicago Tribune, p. 1. 

National Council on Aging. (2019). Healthy aging facts. Retrieved 
from https://www.ncoa.org/news/resources-for-reporters/
get- the-facts/healthy-aging-facts/ 

National Council on Alcoholism and Drug. (2015). Alcohol, drug 
dependence and seniors. Retrieved from https://www.ncadd.org/
about-addiction/seniors/alcohol-drug-dependence-and-
seniors 

National Eye Institute. (2016a). Cataract. Retrieved from 
https://nei.nih.gov/health/cataract/ 

National Eye Institute. (2016b). Glaucoma. Retrieved from 
https://nei.nih.gov/glaucoma/ 

National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. (2006). Make room for all: 
Diversity, cultural competency and discrimination in an aging 


America. Washington, DC: The Policy Institute of the National Gay 
and Lesbian Task Force. 

National Institutes of Health. (2011). What is alpha-1 antitrypsin 
(AAT) deficiency? Retrieved from http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
health/health-topics/topics/aat 

National Institutes of Health. (2013). Hypothyroidism. Retrieved 
from https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health- 
topics/endocrine/hypothyroidism/Pages/fact-sheet.aspx 

National Institutes of Health. (2014a). Aging changes in hormone 
production. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/
article/004000.htm 

National Institutes of Health. (2014b). Cataracts. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/cataract.html 

National Institutes of Health. (2014c). Prescription and illicit drug 
abuse. NIH Senior Health: Built with you in mind. Retrieved from 
http://nihseniorhealth.gov/drugabuse/illicitdrugabuse/01.html 

National Institutes of Health. (2015a). Macular degeneration. 
Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/
maculardegeneration.html 

National Institutes of Health. (2015b). Pain: You can get help. 
Retrieved from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/
pain 

National Institutes of Health. (2016). Quick statistics about hearing. 
Retrieved from https://www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/statistics/
quick-statistics-hearing 

National Institutes of Health: Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases. (2014). Arthritis and rheumatic diseases. Retrieved from 
https://www.niams.nih.gov/Health_Info/Arthritis/
arthritis_rheumatic.asp 

National Institutes of Health: Senior Health. (2013). What is COPD?
Retrieved from http://nihseniorhealth.gov/copd/whatiscopd/
01.html 

National Institutes of Health: Senior Health. (2015). What is 
osteoporosis? http://nihseniorhealth.gov/osteoporosis/
whatisosteoporosis/01.html 


National Institutes of Health: Senior Health (2016a). Problems with 
smell. Retrieved from https://nihseniorhealth.gov/
problemswithsmell/aboutproblemswithsmell/01.html 

National Institutes of Health: Senior Health (2016b). Problems with 
taste. Retrieved from https://nihseniorhealth.gov/
problemswithtaste/aboutproblemswithtaste/01.html 

National Institute on Aging. (2011a). Biology of aging: Research today 
for a healthier tomorrow. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/biology-aging/
preface 

National Institute on Aging. (2011b). Baltimore Longitudinal Study 
of Aging Home Page. (2011). Retrieved from 
http://www.grc.nia.nih.gov/branches/blsa/blsa.htm 

National Institute on Aging. (2012). Heart Health. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/heart-health 

National Institute on Aging. (2013). Sexuality later in life. Retrieved 
from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/sexuality- 
later-life 

National Institute on Aging. (2015a). The Basics of Lewy Body 
Dementia. Retrieved from https://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/
publication/lewy-body-dementia/basics-lewy-body-dementia 

National Institute on Aging. (2015b). Global Health and Aging. 
Retrieved from https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/publication/
global-health-and-aging/living-longer 

National Institute on Aging. (2015c). Hearing loss. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/hearing-loss 

National Institute on Aging. (2015d). Humanity’s aging. Retrieved 
from https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/publication/global- 
health-and-aging/humanitys-aging 

National Institute on Aging. (2015e). Shingles. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/shingles 

National Institute on Aging. (2015f). Skin care and aging. Retrieved 
from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/skin-care- 
and-aging 

National Institute on Aging. (2016). A good night’s sleep. Retrieved 


from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/good- nights-
sleep 

National Library of Medicine. (2014). Aging changes in body shape. 
Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/
003998.htm 

National Library of Medicine. (2019). Aging changes in the heart and 
blood vessels. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/
article/004006.htm 

National Osteoporosis Foundation. (2016). Preventing fractures. 
Retrieved from https://www.nof.org/prevention/preventing- 
fractures/ 

National Sleep Foundation. (2009). Aging and sleep. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/sleep-topics/aging- and-sleep 

Nelson, T. D. (2016). Promoting healthy aging by confronting ageism. 
American Psychologist, 71(4), 276-282. 

Novotney, A. (2019). Social isolation: It could kill you. Monitor on 
Psychology, 50(5), 33-37. 

Office on Women’s Health. (2010a). Raising children again. Retrieved 
from http://www.womenshealth.gov/aging/caregiving/raising-
children-again.html 

Office on Women’s Health. (2010b). Sexual health. Retrieved from 
http://www.womenshealth.gov/aging/sexual-health/ 

Olanow, C. W., & Tatton, W. G. (1999). Etiology and pathogenesis of 
Parkinson’s disease. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 22, 123-144. 

Ortman, J. M., Velkoff, V. A., & Hogan, H. (2014). An aging nation: 
The older population in the United States. United States Census. 
Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/prod/2014pubs/
p25-1140.pdf 

Overstreet, L. (2006). Unhappy birthday: Stereotypes in late 
adulthood. Unpublished manuscript, Texas Woman’s University. 

Owsley, C., Rhodes, L. A., McGwin Jr., G., Mennemeyer, S. T., 
Bregantini, M., Patel, N., … Girkin, C. A. (2015). Eye care quality 
and accessibility improvement in the community (EQUALITY) for 
adults at risk for glaucoma: Study rationale and design. 


International Journal for Equity in Health, 14, 1-14. DOI 10:1186/
s12939-015-0213-8 

Papernow, P. L. (2018). Recoupling in midlife and beyond: From love 
at last to not so fast. Family Processes, 57(1), 52-69. Park, D. C. & 
Gutchess, A. H. (2000). Cognitive aging and everyday life. In D.C. 
Park & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Cognitive Aging: A Primer (pp. 217–232). 
New York: Psychology Press. 

Park, D. C., & Reuter-Lorenz, P. (2009). The adaptive brain: Aging 
and neurocognitive scaffolding. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 
173-196. 

Pew Research Center. (2011). Fighting poverty in a tough economy. 
Americans move in with their relatives. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files.2011/
10.Multigenerationsl-Households-Final1.pdf 

Pilkington, P. D., Windsor, T. D., & Crisp, D. A. (2012). Volunteerism 
and subjective well-being in midlife and older adults: The role 
of supportive social networks. Journal of Gerontology Series B: 
Psychological and Social Sciences, 67 B (2), 249- 260. Doi:10.1093/
geronb/grb154. 

Quinn, J. F., & Cahill, K. E. (2016). The new world of retirement 
income security in America. American Psychologist, 71(4), 321-333. 

Resnikov, S., Pascolini, D., Mariotti, S. P., & Pokharel, G. P. (2004). 
Global data on visual impairment in the year 2002. Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization, 82, 844-851. 

Rhodes, M. G., Castel, A. D., & Jacoby, L. L. (2008). Associative 
recognition of face pairs by younger and older adults: The role of 
familiarity-based processing. Psychology and Aging, 23, 239-249. 

Riediger, M., Freund, A.M., & Baltes, P.B. (2005). Managing life 
through personal goals: Intergoal facilitation and intensity of goal 
pursuit in younger and older adulthood. Journals of Gerontology, 
60B, P84-P91. 

Roberto, K. A. (2016). The complexities of elder abuse. American 
Psychologist, 71(4), 302-311. 

Robin, R. C. (2010). Grown-up, but still irresponsible. New York 


Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/
10weekinreview/10rabin.html>. 

Robins, R.W., & Trzesniewski, K.H. (2005). Self-esteem development 
across the lifespan. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14(3), 158-162. DOI: 10.1111/j.0963- 7214.2005.00353x 

Rowe, J. W. & Kahn, R. L. (1997). Successful aging. The Gerontologist, 
37(4), 433–440. 

Rubinstein, R.L. (2002). The third age. In R.S. Weiss & S.A. Bass (Eds.), 
Challenges of the third age; Meaning and purpose in later life (pp. 
29-40). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Ruckenhauser, G., Yazdani, F., & Ravaglia, G. (2007). Suicide in old 
age: Illness or autonomous decision of the will? Archives of 
Gerontology and Geriatrics, 44(6), S355-S358. 

Saiidi, U. (2019). US life expectancy has been declining. Here’s why. 
Retrieved from https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/09/us-life- 
expectancy-has-been-declining-heres-why.html 

Salthouse, T. A. (1984). Effects of age and skill in typing. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 345. 

Salthouse, T. A. (1996). The processing-speed theory of adult age 
differences in cognition. Psychological Review, 103, 403-428. 
Salthouse, T. A. (2004). What and when of cognitive aging. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 13(4), 140-144. 

Salthouse, T. A., & Babcock, R. L. (1991). Decomposing adult age 
differences in working memory. Developmental Psychology, 27, 
763-776. 

Schacter, D. L., Church, B. A., & Osowiecki, D. O. (1994). Auditory 
priming in elderly adults: Impairment of voice-specific implicit 
memory. Memory, 2, 295-323. 

Schaie, K. W. (1994). The course of adult intellectual development. 
American Psychologist, 49, 304-311. 

Schick, V., Herbenick, D., Reece, M., Sanders, S. A., Dodge, B., 
Middlestadt, S. E., & Fortenberry, J. D. (2010). Sexual behaviors, 
condom use, and sexual health of Americans over 50: Implications 
for sexual health promotion for older adults. Journal of Sexual 
Medicine, 7(5), 315-329. 


Schwartz, B. L. (2011). Memory: Foundations and applications. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Scott, P. J. (2015). Save the 
Males. Men’s Health. Retrieved from http://www.menshealth.com 

Shmerling, R. H. (2016). Why men often die earlier than women. 
Harvard Health Publications. Retrieved from 
http://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/why-men-often-die-
earlier-than-women-201602199137 

Shokri-Kojori, E., Wang, G., Wiers, C., Demiral, S., Guo, M., Kim, 
S.,…Volkow, N. (2018). β-amyloid accumulation in the human brain 
after one night of sleep deprivation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 115(17), 
4483-4488. 

Singer, T., Verhaeghen, P., Ghisletta, P., Lindenberger, U., & Baltes, 
P.B. (2003). The fate of cognition in very old age: Six-year 
longitudinal findings in the Berlin Aging Study (BASE). Psychology 
and Aging, 18, 318-331. 

Siriwardena, A. N., Qureshi, A., Gibson, S., Collier, S., & Lathamn, M. 
(2006). GP’s attitudes to benzodiazepine and “z-drug” prescribing: 
A barrier to implementation of evidence and guidance on 
hypnotics. British Journal of General Practice, 56, 964-967. 

Smith, J. (2000). The fourth age: A period of psychological mortality? 
Max Planck Forum, 4, 75-88. 

Social Security Administration. (2016). Retirement planner: Benefits 
by year of birth. Retrieved from https://www.ssa.gov/planners/
retire/agereduction.html 

Sohn, H. (2015). Health insurance and divorce: Does having your own 
insurance matter? Journal of Marriage and Family, 77, 982-995. 

Spaniol, J., Madden, D. J., & Voss, A. (2006). A diffusion model 
analysis of adult age differences in episodic and semantic long- 
term memory retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1). 
101-117. 

Staudinger, U. M., & Gluck, J. (2011). Psychological wisdom research: 
Commonalities and differences in a growing field. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 62, 215–241. 

Stepler, R. (2016a). Gender gap in share of older adults living alone 


narrows. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/02/18/1-gender-gap-in-
share-of-older-adults-living-alone-narrows/ 

Stepler, R. (2016b). Living arrangements of older adults by gender. 
Pew Research Center Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/02/18/2-living-
arrangements-of-older-americans-by-gender/ 

Stepler, R. (2016c). Smaller share of women 65 or older are living 
alone. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/02/18/smaller-share-
of-women-ages-65-and-older-are-living-alone/ 

Stepler, R. (2016d). Well-being of older adults living alone. Pew 
Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/02/18/3-well-being-of-
older-adults-living-alone/ 

Stepler, R. (2016e). World’s centenarian population projected to 
grow eightfold by 2050. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/04/21/worlds-
centenarian-population-projected-to-grow-eightfold-by- 2050/ 

Stoller, E. P., & Longino, C. F. (2001). “Going home” or “leaving 
home”? The impact of person and place ties on anticipated 
counterstream migration. Gerontologist, 41, 96-102. 

Strait, J.B., & Lakatta, E.G. (2012). Aging-associated cardiovascular 
changes and their relationship to heart failure. Heart Failure 
Clinics, 8(1), 143-164. 

Strine, T. W., Hootman, J. M., Chapman, D. P., Okoro, C. A., & Balluz, 
L. (2005). Health-related quality of life, health risk behaviors, and 
disability among adults with pain-related activity difficulty. 
American Journal of Public Health, 95, 2042–2048. doi:10.2105/
AJPH.2005 .066225 

Strough, J., Hicks, P. J., Swenson, L. M., Cheng, S., & Barnes, K. 
A. (2003). Collaborative everyday problem solving: Interpersonal 
relationships and problem dimensions. International Journal of 
Aging and Human Development, 56, 43- 66. 

Subramanian, S. V., Elwert, F., & Christakis, N. (2008). Widowhood 


and mortality among the elderly: The modifying role of 
neighborhood concentration of widowed individuals. Social 
Science and Medicine, 66, 873-884. 

Sullivan, A. R., & Fenelon, A. (2014). Patterns of widowhood mortality. 
Journal of Gerontology Series B: Psychological and Social Sciences, 
69B, 53-62. 

Tales, A., Muir, J. L., Bayer, A., & Snowden, R. J. (2002). Spatial shifts 
in visual attention in normal aging and dementia of the Alzheimer 
type. Neuropsychologia, 40, 2000-2012. 

Taylor, R., Chatters, L. & Leving, J. (2004). Religion in the lives of 
African Americans. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 

Tennstedt, S., Morris, J., Unverzagt, F., Rebok, G., Willis, S., Ball, 
K., & Marsiske, M. (2006). ACTIVE: Advanced Cognitive Training 
for Independent and Vital Elderly Clinical Trial. Clinical Trials 
Database and Worldwide Listings. Retrieved from 
http://www.clinicaltrialssearch.org/active-advanced-cognitive-
training-for-independent-and-vital-elderly- nct00298558.html 

Tentori, K., Osherson, D., Hasher, L., & May, C. (2001). Wisdom and 
aging: Irrational preferences in college students but not older 
adults. Cognition, 81, B87–B96. 

Thornbury, J. M., & Mistretta, C. M. (1981). Tactile sensitivity as a 
function of age. Journal of Gerontology, 36(1), 34-39. 

Tobin, M., K., Musaraca, K., Disouky, A., Shetti, A., Bheri, A. Honer, W. 
G.,…Lazarov, O. (2019). Human hippocampal neurogenesis persists 
in aged adults and Alzheimer’s disease patients. Cell Stem Cell, 
24(6), 974-982. 

Tsang, A., Von Korff, M., Lee, S., Alonso, J., Karam, E., Angermeyer, M. 
C., . . . Watanabe, M. (2008). Common persistent pain conditions in 
developed and developing countries: Gender and age differences 
and comorbidity with depression- anxiety disorders. The Journal 
of Pain, 9, 883–891. doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2008.05.005 

United States Census Bureau. (2012). 2012 national population 
projections. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/population/projections/data/
natiobnal/2012.html 


United States Census Bureau. (2014a). American Community Survey, 
2014 Estimates: table B10001. Retrieved from at 
http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/
productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_14_5YR_B10001&prodType=t able 

United States Census Bureau. (2014b). U. S. population projections: 
2014-2060. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/population/
projections/data/natiobnal/2014.html 

United States Department of Health and Human Services. (2012). 
A profile of older Americans: 2012. Retrieved from 
http://www.aoa.gov/Aging_Statistics/Profile/2012/docs/
2012profile.pdf 

United States Government Accountability Office. (2011). Income 
security: Older adults and the 2007-2009 recession. 

Washington, DC: Author. United States, National Center for Health 
Statistics. (2002). National Vital Statistics Report, 50(16). Retrieved 
May 7, 2011, from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/
LCWK1_2000.pdf 

United States National Library of Medicine. (2019). Aging changes 
in hair and nails. 
Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/
article/004005.htm 

United States Senate Commission on Long-Term Care. (2013). 
Report to the Congress. Washington, DC: U. S. Government 
Printing Office. 

Vespa, J. & Schondelmyer, E. (2014). A gray revolution in living 
arrangements. Retrieved from http://blogs.census.gov/2015/07/
14/a-gray-revolution-in-living-arrangements/ 

Viña, J., Borrás, C., Gambini, J., Sastre, J., Pallardó, F.V. (2005). Why 
females live longer than males: Control of longevity by sex 
hormones. Science of Aging Knowledge Environment, 23, 17. 

Washington University School of Medicine. (2019). Alzheimer’s 
missing link ID’d, answering what tips brain’s decline. Retrieved 
from https://medicalxpress.com/news/2019-06-alzheimer-link-
idd-brain-decline.html 

Wasscher, E., Schneider, D., Hoffman, S., Beste, C., & Sänger, J. (2012). 


When compensation fails: Attentional deficits in healthy ageing 
caused by visual distraction. Neuropsychologia, 50, 3185-31-92. 

Watson, W. K., & Stelle, C. (2011). Dating for older women: 
Experiences and meanings of dating in later life. Journal of Women 
and Aging, 23, 263-275. 

Webmd. (2016). Sarcopenia with aging. Retrieved from 
http://www.webmd.com/healthy- aging/sarcopenia-with-aging 

Wilcox, B. J. Wilcox, D. C., & Ferrucci, L. (2008). Secrets of healthy 
aging and longevity from exceptional survivors around the globe: 
Lessons from octogenarians to supercentenarians. Journal of 
Gerontology, 63(11), 1181-1185. 

Williamson, E. M., & Evans, F. J. (2000). Cannabinoids in clinical 
practice. Drugs, 60, 1303-1314. World Health Organization. (2019). 
World health statistics 2019. Retrieved from: https://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/handle/10665/324835/9789241565707-eng.pdf 

Wright, K. B., & Query, J. L. (2004). Online support and older adults: A 
theoretical examination of benefits and limitations of computer-
mediated support networks for older adults and possible health 
outcomes. In J. Nussbaum & J. Coupland (Eds.), Handbook of 
communication and aging research (2nd ed., pp. 499–519). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Wrzus, C., Hanel, M., Wagner, J., & Neyer, F. J. (2013). Social network 
changes and life events across the lifespan: A meta- analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 139(1), 53-80. 

Wu, C., Odden, M. C., Fisher, G. G., & Stawski, R. S. (2016). Association 
of retirement age with mortality: a population-based longitudinal 
study among older adults in the USA. Journal of Epidemiology and 
Community Health. doi:10.1136/jech- 2015-207097 

Wu, Z., & Schimmele, C. M. (2007). Uncoupling in late life. 
Generations, 31(3), 41-46. 

Xu, J., Murphy, S. L., Kochanek, K. D., & Bastian, B. A. (2016). Deaths: 
Final data for 2013. National Vital Statistics Report, 64(2), 1-119. 

Youdin, R. (2016). Psychology of Aging 101. New York: Springer 
Publishing. 

Zahodne, L. B., Stern, Y., & Manly, J. (2015). Differing effects of 


education on cognitive decline in diverse elders with low versus 
high educational attainment. Neuropsychology, 29(4), 649-657. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 9 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 29: Cognitive 
Development in Late 
Adulthood 

Chapter 29 Learning Objectives 

Describe how memory changes for those in late 
adulthood 
Describe the theories for why memory changes 
occur 
Describe how cognitive losses in late adulthood are 
exaggerated 
Explain the pragmatics and mechanics of 
intelligence 
Define what is a neurocognitive disorder 
Explain Alzheimer’s disease and other 
neurocognitive disorders 
Describe work and retirement in late adulthood 
Describe how those in late adulthood spend their 
leisure time 



How Does Aging Affect Information Processing? 

There are numerous stereotypes regarding older adults as being 
forgetful and confused, but what does the research on memory and 
cognition in late adulthood reveal? Memory comes in many types, 
such as working, episodic, semantic, implicit, and prospective. 
There are also many processes involved in memory, thus it should 
not be a surprise that there are declines in some types of memory 
and memory processes, while other areas of memory are 
maintained or even show some improvement with age. In this 
section, we will focus on changes in memory, attention, problem-
solving, intelligence, and wisdom, including the exaggeration of 
losses stereotyped in the elderly. 

Memory 

Changes in Working Memory: 
As discussed in chapter 4, working 
memory is the more active, effortful part of our memory system. 
Working memory is composed of three major systems: The 
phonological loop that maintains information about auditory 
stimuli, the visuospatial sketchpad, that maintains information 
about visual stimuli, and the central executive, that oversees 


working memory, allocating resources where needed and monitoring 
whether cognitive strategies are being effective (Schwartz, 2011). 
Schwartz reports that it is the central executive that is most 
negatively impacted by age. In tasks that require allocation of 
attention between different stimuli, older adults fair worse than do 
younger adults. In a study by Göthe, Oberauer, and Kliegl (2007) 
older and younger adults were asked to learn two tasks 
simultaneously. Young adults eventually managed to learn and 
perform each task without any loss in speed and efficiency, although 
it did take considerable practice. None of the older adults were able 
to achieve this. Yet, older adults could perform at young adult levels 
if they had been asked to learn each task individually. Having older 
adults learn and perform both tasks together was too taxing for the 
central executive. In contrast, working memory tasks that do not 
require much input from the central executive, such as the digit 
span test, which uses predominantly the phonological loop, we find 
that older adults perform on par with young adults (Dixon & Cohen, 
2003). 

 


Changes in Long-term Memory: As you should recall, long-term 
memory is divided into semantic (knowledge of facts), episodic 
(events), and implicit (procedural skills, classical conditioning, and 
priming) memories. Semantic and episodic memory is part of the 
explicit memory system, which requires conscious effort to create 
and retrieve. Several studies consistently reveal that episodic 
memory shows greater age-related declines than semantic memory 
(Schwartz, 2011; Spaniol, Madden, & Voss, 2006). It has been 
suggested that episodic memories may be harder to encode and 
retrieve because they contain at least two different types of 
memory, the event and when and where the event took place. In 
contrast, semantic memories are not tied to any particular timeline. 
Thus, only the knowledge needs to be encoded or retrieved 
(Schwartz, 2011). Spaniol et al. (2006) found that retrieval of 
semantic information was considerably faster for both younger and 
older adults than the retrieval of episodic information, with there 


being little difference between the two age groups for semantic 
memory retrieval. They note that older adults’ poorer performance 
on episodic memory appeared to be related to slower processing 
of the information and the difficulty of the task. They found that 
as the task became increasingly difficult, the gap between each age 
groups’ performance increased for episodic memory more so than 
for semantic memory. 

Studies that test general knowledge (semantic memory), such as 
politics and history (Dixon, Rust, Feltmate, & See, 2007), or 
vocabulary/lexical memory (Dahlgren, 1998) often find that older 
adults outperform younger adults. However, older adults do find 
that they experience more “blocks” at retrieving information that 
they know. In other words, they experience more tip-of-the-tongue(TOT) events than do younger adults (Schwartz, 2011). 

Implicit memory requires little conscious effort and often 
involves skills or more habitual patterns of behavior. This type of 
memory shows few declines with age. Many studies assessing 
implicit memory measure the effects of priming. Priming refers to 
changes in behavior as a result of frequent or recent experiences. If 
you were shown pictures of food and asked to rate their appearance 
and then later were asked to complete words such as s_ _ p, you 
may be more likely to write soup than soap, or ship. The images 
of food “primed” your memory for words connected to food. Does 
this type of memory and learning change with age? The answer is 
typically “no” for most older adults (Schacter, Church, & Osowiecki, 
1994). 

Prospective memory refers to remembering things we need to do 
in the future, such as remembering a doctor’s appointment next 
week or to take medication before bedtime. It has been described as 
“the flip-side of episodic memory” (Schwartz, 2011, p. 119). Episodic 
memories are the recall of events in our past, while the focus of 
prospective memories is of events in our future. In general, humans 
are fairly good at prospective memory if they have little else to do 
in the meantime. However, when there are competing tasks that are 


also demanding our attention, this type of memory rapidly declines. 
The explanation given for this is that this form of memory draws on 
the central executive of working memory, and when this component 
of working memory is absorbed in other tasks, our ability to 
remember to do something else in the future is more likely to slip 
out of memory (Schwartz, 2011). However, prospective memories 
are often divided into time-based prospective memories, such as 
having to remember to do something at a future time, or event-
based prospective memories, such as having to remember to do 
something when a certain event occurs. When age-related declines 
are found, they are more likely to be time-based, than event-based, 
and in laboratory settings rather than in the real-world, where older 
adults can show comparable or slightly better prospective memory 
performance (Henry, MacLeod, Phillips & Crawford, 2004; Luo & 
Craik, 2008). This should not be surprising given the tendency of 
older adults to be more selective in where they place their physical, 
mental, and social energy. Having to remember a doctor’s 
appointment is of greater concern than remembering to hit the 
space-bar on a computer every time the word “tiger” is displayed. 


Recall versus Recognition: Memory performance often depends 
on whether older adults are asked to simply recognize previously 
learned material or recall material on their own. Generally, for all 
humans, recognition tasks are easier because they require less 
cognitive energy. Older adults show roughly equivalent memory to 
young adults when assessed with a recognition task (Rhodes, Castel, 
& Jacoby, 2008). With recall measures, older adults show memory 
deficits in comparison to younger adults. While the effect is initially 
not that large, starting at age 40 adults begin to show declines in 
recall memory compared to younger adults (Schwartz, 2011). 

The Age Advantage: Fewer age differences are observed when 
memory cues are available, such as for recognition memory tasks, or 
when individuals can draw upon acquired knowledge or experience. 
For example, older adults often perform as well if not better than 
young adults on tests of word knowledge or vocabulary. With age 
often comes expertise, and research has pointed to areas where 
aging experts perform quite well. For example, older typists were 
found to compensate for age-related declines in speed by looking 
farther ahead at the printed text (Salthouse, 1984). Compared to 
younger players, older chess experts focus on a smaller set of 
possible moves, leading to greater cognitive efficiency (Charness, 
1981). Accrued knowledge of everyday tasks, such as grocery prices, 
can help older adults to make better decisions than young adults 
(Tentori, Osheron, Hasher, & May 2001). 


Attention and Problem Solving 

Changes in Attention in Late Adulthood: Changes in sensory 
functioning and speed of processing information in late adulthood 
often translate into changes in attention (Jefferies et al., 2015). 
Research has shown that older adults are less able to selectively 
focus on information while ignoring distractors (Jefferies et al., 2015; 
Wascher, Schneider, Hoffman, Beste, & Sänger, 2012), although 
Jefferies and her colleagues found that when given double-time, 
older adults could perform at young adult levels. Other studies 
have also found that older adults have greater difficulty shifting 
their attention between objects or locations (Tales, Muir, Bayer, 
& Snowden, 2002). Consider the implication of these attentional 
changes for older adults. 

How do changes or maintenance of cognitive ability affect older 
adults’ everyday lives? Researchers have studied cognition in the 
context of several different everyday activities. One example is 
driving. Although older adults often have more years of driving 
experience, cognitive declines related to reaction time or 
attentional processes may pose limitations under certain 
circumstances (Park & Gutchess, 2000). In contrast, research on 
interpersonal problem solving suggested that older adults use more 
effective strategies than younger adults to navigate through social 
and emotional problems (Blanchard-Fields, 2007). In the context of 
work, researchers rarely find that older individuals perform poorer 
on the job (Park & Gutchess, 2000). Similar to everyday problem 
solving, older workers may develop more efficient strategies and 
rely on expertise to compensate for cognitive decline. 

Problem Solving: Problem-solving tasks that require processing 
non-meaningful information quickly (a kind of task that might be 
part of a laboratory experiment on mental processes) declines with 
age. However, many real-life challenges facing older adults do not 
rely on the speed of processing or making choices on one’s own. 
Older adults resolve everyday problems by relying on input from 


others, such as family and friends. They are also less likely than 
younger adults to delay making decisions on important matters, 
such as medical care (Strough, Hicks, Swenson, Cheng & Barnes, 
2003; Meegan & Berg, 2002). 

What might explain these deficits as we age? The processing 
speed theory, proposed by Salthouse (1996, 2004), suggests that as 
the nervous system slows with advanced age our ability to process 
information declines. This slowing of processing speed may explain 
age differences in many different cognitive tasks. For instance, as 
we age, working memory becomes less efficient (Craik & Bialystok, 
2006). Older adults also need a longer time to complete mental 
tasks or make decisions. Yet, when given sufficient time older adults 
perform as competently as do young adults (Salthouse, 1996). Thus, 
when speed is not imperative to the task healthy older adults do not 
show cognitive declines. 

In contrast, inhibition theory argues that older adults have 
difficulty with inhibitory functioning, or the ability to focus on certain 
information while suppressing attention to less pertinent information 
tasks (Hasher & Zacks, 1988). Evidence comes from directed 
forgetting research. In directed forgetting people are asked to forget 
or ignore some information, but not other information. For example, 
you might be asked to memorize a list of words but are then told 
that the researcher made a mistake and gave you the wrong list 
and asks you to “forget” this list. You are then given a second list 
to memorize. While most people do well at forgetting the first list, 
older adults are more likely to recall more words from the “forget-
to-recall” list than are younger adults (Andrés, Van der Linden, & 
Parmentier, 2004). 

Cognitive losses exaggerated: While there are information 
processing losses in late adulthood, the overall loss has been 
exaggerated (Garrett, 2015). One explanation is that the type of tasks 
that people are tested on tend to be meaningless. For example, older 
individuals are not motivated to remember a random list of words 
in a study, but they are motivated for more meaningful material 
related to their life, and consequently perform better on those tests. 


Another reason is that the research is often cross-sectional. When 
age comparisons occur longitudinally, however, the amount of loss 
diminishes (Schaie, 1994). A third reason is that the loss may be due 
to a lack of opportunity in using various skills. When older adults 
practiced skills, they performed as well as they had previously. 
Although diminished performance speed is especially noteworthy 
in the elderly, Schaie (1994) found that statistically removing the 
effects of speed diminished the individual’s performance declines 
significantly. In fact, Salthouse and Babcock (1991) demonstrated 
that processing speed accounted for all but 1% of age-related 
differences in working memory when testing individuals from 18 to 
82. Finally, it is well established that our hearing and vision decline 
as we age. Longitudinal research has proposed that deficits in 
sensory functioning explain age differences in a variety of cognitive 
abilities (Baltes & Lindenberger, 1997). Not surprisingly, more years 
of education, and subsequently higher income, are associated with 
the higher cognitive level and slower cognitive decline (Zahodne, 
Stern, & Manly, 2015). 

Intelligence and Wisdom 


When looking at scores on traditional intelligence tests, tasks 
measuring verbal skills show minimal or no age-related declines, 


Baltes indicated that pragmatics of intelligence show a little decline 
and typically increase with age. 
while scores on performance tests, which measure solving problems 
quickly, decline with age (Botwinick, 1984). This profile mirrors 
crystallized and fluid intelligence. As you recall from the last 
chapter, crystallized intelligence encompasses abilities that draw 
upon experience and knowledge. Measures of crystallized 
intelligence include vocabulary tests, solving number problems, and 
understanding texts. Fluid intelligence refers to information 
processing abilities, such as logical reasoning, remembering lists, 
spatial ability, and reaction time. Baltes (1993) introduced two 
additional types of intelligence to reflect cognitive changes in aging. 
Pragmatics of intelligence are cultural exposure to facts and 
procedures that are maintained as one age and are similar to 
crystallized intelligence. Mechanics of intelligence are dependent on 
brain functioning and decline with age, similar to fluid intelligence.

Additionally, the pragmatics of intelligence may compensate for 
the declines that occur with the mechanics of intelligence. In 
summary, global cognitive declines are not as typical as one age, 
and individuals compensate for some cognitive declines, especially 
processing speed. 

Wisdom is the ability to use accumulated knowledge about practical 
matters that allow for sound judgment and decision making. A wise 
person is insightful and has knowledge that can be used to 
overcome obstacles in living. Does aging bring wisdom? While living 
longer brings experience, it does not always bring wisdom. Paul 
Baltes and his colleagues (Baltes & Kunzmann, 2004; Baltes & 
Staudinger, 2000) suggest that wisdom is rare. In addition, the 
emergence of wisdom can be seen in late adolescence and young 
adulthood, with there being few gains in wisdom over the course 
of adulthood (Staudinger & Gluck, 2011). This would suggest that 
factors other than age are stronger determinants of wisdom. 
Occupations and experiences that emphasize others rather than 
self, along with personality characteristics, such as openness to 
experience and generativity, are more likely to provide the building 


blocks of wisdom (Baltes & Kunzmann, 2004). Age combined with 
certain types of experience and/or personality brings wisdom. 

Neurocognitive Disorders 


Historically, the term dementia was used to refer to an individual 
experiencing difficulties with memory, language, abstract thinking, 
reasoning, decision making, and problem-solving (Erber & 
Szuchman (2015). However, in the latest edition of the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM-5) 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013) the term dementia has 
been replaced by the neurocognitive disorder. A major 
neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed as a significant cognitive 
decline from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive 
domains and interferes with independent functioning, while a minor 
neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed as a modest cognitive decline 
from a previous level of performance in one or more cognitive 
domains and does not interfere with independent functioning. There 
are several different neurocognitive disorders that are typically 
demonstrated in late adulthood and determining the exact type can 
be difficult because the symptoms may overlap with each other. 
Diagnosis often includes a medical history, physical exam, 
laboratory tests, and changes noted in behavior. Alzheimer’s 
disease, vascular neurocognitive disorder and neurocognitive 
disorder with Lewy bodies will be discussed below. 

Alzheimer’s Disease: Probably the most well-known and most 
common neurocognitive disorder for older individuals is 
Alzheimer’s disease. In 2016 an estimated 5.4 million Americans 
were diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease (Alzheimer’s Association, 
2016), which was approximately one in nine aged 65 and over. By 
2050 the number of people age 65 and older with Alzheimer’s 
disease is projected to be 13.8 million if there are no medical 
breakthroughs to prevent or cure the disease. Alzheimer’s disease 


is the 6th leading cause of death in the United States, but the 5th 
leading cause for those 65 and older. Among the top 10 causes of 
death in America, Alzheimer’s disease is the only one that cannot be 
prevented, cured, or even slowed. Current estimates indicate that 
Alzheimer’s disease affects approximately 50% of those identified 
with a neurocognitive disorder (Cohen & Eisdorfer, 2011). 

Alzheimer’s disease has a gradual onset with subtle personality 
changes and memory loss that differs from normal age-related 
memory problems occurring first. Confusion, difficulty with change, 
and deterioration in language, problem-solving skills, and 
personality become evident next. In the later stages, the individual 
loses physical coordination and is unable to complete everyday 
tasks, including self-care and personal hygiene (Erber & Szuchman, 
2015). Lastly, individuals lose the ability to respond to their 
environment, to carry on a conversation, and eventually to control 
movement (Alzheimer’s Association, 2016). On average people with 
Alzheimer’s survive eight years, but some may live up to 20 years. 
The disease course often depends on the individual’s age and 
whether they have other health conditions. 

The greatest risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease is age, but there are 
genetic and environmental factors that can also contribute. Some 
forms of Alzheimer’s are hereditary, and with the early onset type, 
several rare genes have been identified that directly cause 


Alzheimer’s. People who inherit these genes tend to develop 
symptoms in their 30s, 40s, and 50s. Five percent of those identified 
with Alzheimer’s disease are younger than age 65. When Alzheimer’s 
disease is caused by deterministic genes, it is called familial 
Alzheimer’s disease (Alzheimer’s Association, 2016). Traumatic brain 
injury is also a risk factor, as well as obesity, hypertension, high 
cholesterol, and diabetes (Carlson, 2011). 

Βeta Amyloid and Tau: According to Erber and Szuchman (2015) 
the problems that occur with Alzheimer’s disease are due to the 
“death of neurons, the breakdown of connections between them, 
and the extensive formation of plaques and tau, which interfere 
with neuron functioning and neuron survival” (p. 50). Plaques are 
abnormal formations of protein pieces called beta-amyloid. Beta-
amyloid comes from a larger protein found in the fatty membrane 
surrounding nerve cells. Because beta-amyloid is sticky, it builds up 
into plaques (Alzheimer’s Association, 2016). 
These plaques appear 
to block cell communication and may also trigger an inflammatory 
response in the immune system, which leads to further neuronal 
death. 

Tau is an important protein that helps maintain the brain’s 
transport system. When tau malfunctions, it changes into twisted 
strands called tangles that disrupt the transport system. 
Consequently, nutrients and other supplies cannot move through 
the cells and they eventually die. The death of neurons leads to 
the brain shrinking and affecting all aspects of brain functioning. 
For example, the hippocampus is involved in learning and memory, 
and the brain cells in this region are often the first to be damaged. 
This is why memory loss is often one of the earliest symptoms of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Figures 9.32 and 9.33 illustrate the difference 
between an Alzheimer’s brain and a healthy brain. 




Washington University School of Medicine (2019) reported that 
researchers associated with the School of Medicine discovered that 
failing immune cells, known as microglia, appear to be the link 
between amyloid and tau, which are the two damaging proteins 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Amyloid plaques, which appear first, do not 
cause Alzheimer’s, but the presence of amyloid leads to the 


formation of tau tangles, which are responsible for the memory 
loss and cognitive deficits seen in those with Alzheimer’s disease. 
It appears that weakening microglia causes the amyloid plaques 
to injure nearby neurons, thus creating a toxic environment that 
increases the formation and spread of tau tangles. These findings 
could lead to a new approach for developing therapies for 
Alzheimer’s. 

Sleep Deprivation and Alzheimer’s: Studies suggest that sleep 
plays a role in clearing both beta-amyloid and tau out of the brain. 
Shokri-Kojori et al. (2018) scanned participants’ brains after getting 
a full night’s rest and after 31 hours without sleep. Beta-amyloid 
increased by about 5% in the participants’ brains after losing a night 
of sleep. These changes occurred in brain regions that included 
the thalamus and hippocampus, which are associated with the early 
stages of Alzheimer’s disease. Shokri-Kojori et al. also found that 
participants with the largest increases in beta-amyloid reported the 
worst mood after sleep deprivation. These findings support other 
studies that have found that the hippocampus and thalamus are 
involved in mood disorders. 

Additionally, Holth et al. (2019) found that healthy adults who 
remained awake all day and night had tau levels that were elevated 
by about 50 percent. Once tau begins to accumulate in brain tissue, 
the protein can spread from one brain area to the next along with 
neural connections. Holth et al. also found that older people who 
had more tau tangles in their brains by PET scanning had a less 
slow-wave, deep sleep. Holth et al. concluded that good sleep habits 
and/or treatments designed to encourage plenty of high-quality 
sleep might play an important role in slowing Alzheimer’s disease. 
In contrast, poor sleep might worsen the condition and serve as an 
early warning sign of Alzheimer’s disease. 

Healthy Lifestyle Combats Alzheimer’s: Dhana and colleagues 
with the Rush University Medical Center in Chicago examined how 
healthy lifestyle mitigates the risk of Alzheimer’s disease (Natanson, 
2019). The researchers followed a diverse group of 2765 participants 
for 9 years and focused on five low-risk lifestyle factors: healthy 


diet, at least 150 minutes/week of moderate to vigorous physical 
activity, not smoking, light to moderate alcohol intake, and engaging 
in cognitively stimulating activities. 

Results indicated that those who adopted four or five low-risk 
lifestyle factors had a 60% lower risk of Alzheimer’s disease when 
compared with participants who did not follow any or only one 
of the low-risk factors. The authors concluded that incorporating 
these lifestyle changes can have a positive effect on one’s brain 
functioning and lower the risk for Alzheimer’s disease. 

Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder is the second most common 
neurocognitive disorder affecting 0.2% in the 65-70 years age group 
and 16% of individuals 80 years and older (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013). The vascular neurocognitive disorder is 
associated with a blockage of cerebral blood vessels that affects 
one part of the brain rather than a general loss of brain cells seen 
with Alzheimer’s disease. Personality is not as affected in vascular 
neurocognitive disorder, and more males are diagnosed than 
females (Erber and Szuchman, 2015). It also comes on more abruptly 
than Alzheimer’s disease and has a shorter course before death. Risk 
factors include smoking, diabetes, heart disease, hypertension, or a 
history of strokes. 

Neurocognitive Disorder with Lewy bodies: According to the 


National Institute on Aging (2015a), Lewy bodies are microscopic 
protein deposits found in neurons seen postmortem. They affect 
chemicals in the brain that can lead to difficulties in thinking, 
movement, behavior, and mood. Neurocognitive Disorder with Lewy 
bodies is the third most common form and affects more than 1 
million Americans. It typically begins at age 50 or older and appears 
to affect slightly more men than women. The disease lasts 
approximately 5 to 7 years from the time of diagnosis to death but 
can range from 2 to 20 years depending on the individual’s age, 
health, and severity of symptoms. Lewy bodies can occur in both the 
cortex and brain stem which results in cognitive as well as motor 
symptoms (Erber & Szuchman, 2015). The movement symptoms are 
similar to those with Parkinson’s disease and include tremors and 
muscle rigidity. However, the motor disturbances occur at the same 
time as the cognitive symptoms, unlike Parkinson’s disease when 
the cognitive symptoms occur well after the motor symptoms. 

Individuals diagnosed with Neurocognitive Disorder with Lewy 
bodies also experience sleep disturbances, recurrent visual 
hallucinations, and are at risk for falling. 

Work, Retirement, and Leisure 

Work: According to the United States Census Bureau, in 1994, 
approximately 12% of those employed were 65 and over, and by 
2016, the percentage had increased to 18% of those employed 
(McEntarfer, 2019). Looking more closely at the age ranges, more 
than 40% of Americans in their 60s are still working, while 14% of 
people in their 70s and just 4% of those 80 and older are currently 
employed (Livingston, 2019). Even though they make up a smaller 
number of workers overall, those 65- to 74-year-old and 75-and- 
older age groups are projected to have the fastest rates of growth 
in the next decade. See Figure 9.35 for the projected annual growth 
rate in the labor force by age in percentages, 2014-2024. 


Livingston (2019) reported that similar to other age groups, those 
with higher levels of education are more likely to be employed. 
Approximately 37% of adults who are 60 and older and have a 
bachelor’s degree or more are working. In contrast, 31% with some 
college experience and 21% of those with a high school diploma or 
less are still working at age 60 and beyond. Additionally, men 60 
and older are more likely to be working than women (33% vs. 24%). 
Not only are older persons working more, but they are also earning 
more than previously, and their growth in earnings is greater 
compared to workers of other ages (McEntarfer, 2019). 

Older adults are proving just as capable as younger adults at 
the workplace. In fact, jobs that require social skills, accumulated 
knowledge, and relevant experiences favor older adults (Erber & 
Szuchman, 2015). Older adults also demonstrate lower rates of 
absenteeism and greater investment in their work. 

Transitioning into Retirement: For most Americans, retirement 


is a process and not a one-time event (Quinn & Cahill, 2016). Sixty 
percent of workers transition straight to bridge jobs, which are 
often part-time and occur between a career and full retirement. 
About 15% of workers get another job after being fully retired. This 
may be due to not having adequate finances after retirement or 
not enjoying their retirement. Some of these jobs may be in encore 
careers 
or work in a different field from the one in which they retired. 
Approximately 10% of workers begin phasing into retirement by 
reducing their hours. However, not all employers will allow this due 
to pension regulations. 

Retirement age changes: Looking at retirement data, the average 
age of retirement declined from more than 70 in 1910 to age 63 in 
the early 1980s. However, this trend has reversed and the current 
average age is now 65. Additionally, 18.5% of those over the age of 
65 continue to work (US Department of Health and Human Services, 
2012) compared with only 12% in 1990 (U. S. Government 
Accountability Office, 2011). With individuals living longer, once 
retired the average amount of time a retired worker collects social 
security is approximately 17-18 years (James, Matz-Costa, & Smyer, 
2016). 

When to retire: Laws often influence when someone decides to 
retire. In 1986 the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) 
was amended, and mandatory retirement was eliminated for most 
workers (Erber & Szuchman, 2015). Pilots, air traffic controllers, 
federal law enforcement, national park rangers, and firefighters 
continue to have enforced retirement ages. Consequently, for most 
workers, they can continue to work if they choose and are able. 
Social security benefits also play a role. For those born before 1938, 
they can receive full social security benefits at age 65. For those 
born between 1943 and 1954, they must wait until age 66 for full 
benefits, and for those born after 1959, they must wait until age 
67 (Social Security Administration, 2016). Extra months are added 
to those born in years between. For example, if born in 1957, the 
person must wait until 66 years and 6 months. The longer one 
waits to receive social security, the more money will be paid out. 


Those retiring at age 62, will only receive 75% of their monthly 
benefits. Medicare health insurance is another entitlement that is 
not available until one is aged 65. 

Delayed Retirement: Older adults primarily choose to delay 
retirement due to economic reasons (Erber & Szchman, 2015). 
Financially, continuing to work provides not only added income 
but also does not dip into retirement savings which may not be 
sufficient. Historically, there have been three parts to retirement 
income; that is, social security, a pension plan, and individual 
savings (Quinn & Cahill, 2016). With the 2008 recession, pension 
plans lost value for most workers. Consequently, many older 
workers have had to work later in life to compensate for absent 
or minimal pension plans and personal savings. 
Social security was 
never intended to replace full income, and the benefits provided 
may not cover all the expenses, so elders continue to work. 
Unfortunately, many older individuals are unable to secure later 
employment, and those especially vulnerable include persons with 
disabilities, single women, the oldest- old, and individuals with 
intermittent work histories. 


Some older adults delay retirement for psychological reasons, such 
as health benefits and social contacts. 
Recent research indicates 
that delaying retirement has been associated with helping one live 
longer. When looking at both healthy and unhealthy retirees, a one-
year delay in retiring was associated with a decreased risk of death 
from all causes (Wu, Odden, Fisher, & Stawski, 2016). When 
individuals are forced to retire due to health concerns or 
downsizing, they are more likely to have negative physical and 
psychological consequences (Erber & Szuchman, 2015). 

Retirement Stages: Atchley (1994) identified several phases that 
individuals go through when they retire: 

Remote pre-retirement phase includes fantasizing about what 
one wants to do in retirement 
Immediate pre-retirement phase when concrete plans are 
established 
Actual retirement 
Honeymoon phase when retirees travel and participate in 
activities they could not do while working 
Disenchantment phase when retirees experience an emotional 
let-down 
Reorientation phase when the retirees attempt to adjust to 
retirement by making less hectic plans and getting into a regular 
routine 


Not everyone goes through every stage, but this model 
demonstrates that retirement is a process. 

Post-retirement: Those who look most forward to retirement 
and have plans are those who anticipate adequate income (Erber & 
Szuchman, 2015). This is especially true for males who have worked 
consistently and have a pension and/or adequate savings. Once 
retired, staying active and socially engaged is important. 
Volunteering, caregiving, and informal helping can keep seniors 
engaged. Kaskie, Imhof, Cavanaugh, and Culp (2008) found that 70% 
of retirees who are not involved in productive activities spent most 


of their time watching TV, which is correlated with negative affect. 
In contrast, being productive improves well-being. 

Elder Education: Attending college is not just for the young as 
discussed in the previous chapter. There are many reasons why 
someone in late adulthood chooses to attend college. 

PNC Financial Services surveyed retirees aged 70 and over and 
found that 58% indicated that they had retired before they had 
planned (Holland, 2014). Many of these individuals chose to pursue 
additional training to improve skills to return to work in a second 
career. Others may be looking to take their career in a new 
direction. For some older students who no longer are focus on 
financial reasons, returning to school is intended to enable them 
to pursue work that is personally fulfilling. Attending college in late 
adulthood is also a great way for seniors to stay young and keep 
their minds sharp. Even if an elder chooses not to attend college 
for a degree, there are many continuing education programs on 
topics of interest available. In 1975, a nonprofit educational travel 
organization called Elderhostel began in New Hampshire with five 


languages, budgeting, and holistic medicines, are among the 
courses offered. Older adults who have higher levels of education 
are more likely to take continuing education. However, offering 
more educational experiences to a diverse group of older adults, 
including those who are institutionalized in nursing homes, can 
bring enhance the quality of life. 
programs for several hundred retired participants (DiGiacomo, 
2015). This program combined college classroom time with travel 
tours and experiential learning experiences. In 2010 the 
organization changed its name to Road Scholar, and it now serves 
100,000 people per year in the U.S. and in 150 countries. Academic 
courses, as well as practical skills such as computer classes, foreign 

Leisure: During the past 10 years, leisure time for Americans 
60 and older has remained at about 7 hours a day. However, the 
amount of time spent on TVs, computers, tablets or other electronic 
devices has risen almost 30 minutes per day over the past decade 
(Livingston, 2019). Those 60 and older now spend more than half of 
their daily leisure time (4 hours and 16 minutes) in front of screens. 
Screen time has increased for those in their 60s, 70s, 80s and 
beyond, and across genders and education levels. This rise in screen 
time coincides with significant growth in the use of digital 
technology by older Americans. In 2000, 14% of those aged 65 and 
older used the Internet, and now 73% are users and 53% own 
smartphones. Alternatively, the time spent on other recreational 
activities, such as reading or socializing, has gone down slightly. 
People with less education spend more of their leisure time on 
screens and less time reading compared with those with more 
education. Less-educated adults also spend less time exercising: 
12 minutes a day for those with a high school diploma or less, 
compared with 26 minutes for college graduates. 


References 

Acierno, R., Hernandez, M. A., Amstadter, A. B., Resnick, H. S., Steve, 
K., Muzzy, W., & Kilpatrick, D. G. (2010). Prevalence and correlates 
of emotional, physical, sexual, and financial abuse and potential 
neglect in the United States: The National Elder Mistreatment 
Study. American Journal of Public Health, 100, 292-297. 

Administration on Aging. (2017). 2017 Profile of older Americans. 
Retrieved from: https://acl.gov/sites/default/files/
Aging%20and%20Disability%20in%20America/
2017OlderAmericansProfile.pdf 

Alleccia, J., & Bailey, M. (2019, June 12). A concern for LGBT boomers. 
The Chicago Tribune, pp. 1-2. 

Alterovitz, S. S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2011). Partner preferences 
across the lifespan: Online dating by older adults. Psychology of 
Popular Media Culture, 1, 89-95. 

Alzheimer’s Association. (2016). Know the 10 signs. Early detection 


matters. Retrieved from: http://www.alz.org/national/
documents/tenwarnsigns.pdf 

American Federation of Aging Research. (2011). Theories of aging.
Retrieved from http://www.afar.org/docs/migrated/
111121_INFOAGING_GUIDE_THEORIES_OF_AGINGFR.pdf 

American Heart Association. (2014). Overweight in children. 
Retrieved from http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/
HealthyLiving/HealthyKids/ChildhoodObesity/Overweight-in- 
Children_UCM_304054_Article.jsp#.V5EIlPkrLIU 

American Lung Association. (2018). Taking her breath away: The 
rise of COPD in women. Retrieved from https://www.lung.org/
assets/documents/research/rise-of-copd-in-women-full.pdf 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. 

American Psychological Association. (2016). Older adults’ health and 
age-related changes. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/pi/
aging/resources/guides/older.aspx 

Andrés, P., Van der Linden, M., & Parmentier, F. B. R. (2004). Directed 
forgetting in working memory: Age-related differences. Memory, 
12, 248-256. 

Antonucci, T. C. (2001). Social relations: An examination of social 
networks, social support and sense of control. In J.E. Birren & K. 
W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging (5th ed., pp. 
427–453). New York: Academic Press. 

Arias, E., & Xu, J. (2019). United States life tables, 2017. National Vital 
Statistics Reports, 68(7), 1-66. 

Arthritis Foundation. (2017). What is arthritis? Retrieved from 
http://www.arthritis.org/about-arthritis/understanding- 
arthritis/what-is-arthritis.php 

Ash, A. S., Kroll-Desroisers, A. R., Hoaglin, D. C., Christensen, K., 
Fang, H., & Perls, T. T. (2015). Are members of long-lived families 
healthier than their equally long-lived peers? Evidence from the 


long life family study. Journal of Gerontology: Series A: Biological 
Sciences and Medical Sciences. Advance online publication. 
doi:10.1093/gerona/glv015 

Atchley, R. C. (1994). Social forces and aging (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth. 

Balducci, L., & Extermann, M. (2000). Management of cancer if the 
older person: A practical approach. The Oncologist. Retrieved 
from http://theoncologist.alphamedpress.org/content/5/3/
224.full 

Baltes, B. B., & Dickson, M. W. (2001). Using life-span models in 
industrial/organizational psychology: The theory of selective 
optimization with compensation (soc). Applied Developmental 
Science, 5, 51-62. 

Baltes, P. B. (1993). The aging mind: Potential and limits. The 
Gerontologist, 33, 580-594. 

Baltes, P.B. & Kunzmann, U. (2004). The two faces of wisdom: 
Wisdom as a general theory of knowledge and judgment about 
excellence in mind and virtue vs. wisdom as everyday realization 
in people and products. Human Development, 47(5), 290-299. 

Baltes, P. B. & Lindenberger, U. (1997). Emergence of powerful 
connection between sensory and cognitive functions across the 
adult life span: A new window to the study of cognitive aging? 
Psychology and Aging, 12, 12–21. 

Baltes, P. B., & Staudinger, U. M. (2000). Wisdom: A metaheuristic 
(pragmatic) to orchestrate mind and virtue toward excellence. 
American Psychologist, 55 (1), 122-136. 

Barker, (2016). Psychology for nursing and healthcare professionals. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Barnes, S. F. (2011a). Fourth age-the final years of adulthood. San 
Diego State University Interwork Institute. Retrieved from 
http://calbooming.sdsu.edu/documents/TheFourthAge.pdf 

Barnes, S. F. (2011b). Third age-the golden years of adulthood. San 
Diego State University Interwork Institute. Retrieved from 
http://calbooming.sdsu.edu/documents/TheThirdAge.pdf 


Bartlett, Z. (2014). The Hayflick limit. Embryo Project Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved from http://embryo.asu.edu/handle/10776/8237 

Bennett, K. M., Hughes, G. M., & Smith, P. T. (2005). Psychological 
response to later life widowhood: Coping and the effects of 
gender. Omega, 51, 33-52. 

Benson, J.J., & Coleman, M. (2016). Older adults developing a 
preference for living apart together. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 18, 797-812. 

Berger, N. A., Savvides, P., Koroukian, S. M., Kahana, E. F., Deimling, 
G. T., Rose, J. H., Bowman, K. F., & Miller, R. H. (2006). Cancer 
in the elderly. Transactions of the American Clinical and 
Climatological Association, 117, 147-156. 

Berk, L. (2007). Development through the life span (4th ed.). Boston: 
Allyn and Bacon. 

Blanchard-Fields, F. (2007). Everyday problem solving and emotion: 
An adult development perspective. Current Directions in 
Psychoogical Science, 16, 26–31 

Blank, T. O. (2005). Gay men and prostate cancer: Invisible diversity. 
American Society of Clinical Oncology, 23, 2593–2596. doi:10.1200/ 
JCO.2005.00.968 

Blazer, D. G., & Wu, L. (2009). The epidemiology of substance use 
and disorders among middle aged and elderly community adults: 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health. American Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 17, 237-245. 

Bookwala, J., Marshall, K. I., & Manning, S. W. (2014). Who needs a 
friend? Marital status transitions and physical health outcomes in 
later life. Health Psychology, 33(6), 505-515. 

Borysławski, K., & Chmielewski, P. (2012). A prescription for healthy 
aging. In: A Kobylarek (Ed.), Aging: Psychological, biological and 
social dimensions (pp. 33-40). Wrocław: Agencja Wydawnicza. 

Botwinick, J. (1984). Aging and behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Springer. 

Bowden, J. L., & McNulty, P. A. (2013). Age-related changes in 
cutaneous sensation in the healthy human hand. Age (Dordrecht, 
Netherlannds), 35(4), 1077-1089. 

Boyd, K. (2014). What are cataracts? American Academy of 


Ophthalmology. Retrieved from http://www.aao.org/eye- 
health/diseases/what-are-cataracts 

Boyd, K. (2016). What is macular degeneration? American Academy 
of Ophthalmology. Retrieved from http://www.aao.org/eye-
health/diseases/amd-macular-degeneration 

Brehm, S. S., Miller, R., Perlman, D., & Campbell, S. (2002). Intimate 
relationships (3rd ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education. 

Buman, M. P. (2013). Does exercise help sleep in the elderly? 
Retrieved from https://sleepfoundation.org/ask-the-expert/
does-exercise-help-sleep-the-elderly 

Cabeza, R., Anderson, N. D., Locantore, J. K., & McIntosh, A. R. (2002). 
Aging gracefully: Compensatory brain activity in high- performing 
older adults. NeuroImage, 17, 1394-1402. 

Carlson, N. R. (2011). Foundations of behavioral neuroscience (8th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson Education. 

Carr, D. (2004a). The desire to date and remarry among older 
widows and widowers. Journal of Marriage and Family, 66, 1051– 
1068. 

Carr, D. (2004b). Gender, preloss marital dependence, and older 
adults’ adjustment to widowhood. Journal of Marriage and Family, 
66, 220-235. 

Carstensen, L. L. (1993). Motivation for social contact across the 
life span: A theory of socioemotional selectivity. In J. E. Jacobs 
(Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1992: Developmental 
perspectives on motivation (pp. 209–254). Lincoln, NE: University 
of Nebraska Press. 

Carstenson, L. L., Fung, H. H., & Charles, S. T. (2003). Socioemotional 
selectivity theory and the regulation of emotion in the second half 
of life. Motivation and Emotion, 27, 103-123. 

Carstensen, L. L., Gottman, J. M., & Levensen, R. W. (1995). Emotional 
behavior in long-term marriage. Psychology and Aging, 10, 140–149. 

Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowitz, D. M., & Charles, S. T. (1999). Taking 
time seriously: A theory of socioemotional selectivity. American 
Psychologist, 54, 165–181. 

Caruso, C., Accardi, G., Virruso, C., & Candore, G. (2013). Sex, gender 


and immunosenescence: A key to understand the different 
lifespan between men and women? Immunity & Ageing, 10, 20. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2008). Persons age 50 
and over: Centers for disease control and prevention. Atlanta, GA: 
Author. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2009). Percent of U. 
S. adults 55 and over with chronic conditions. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/health_policy/
adult_chronic_conditions.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). Rationale for 
regular reporting on health disparities and inequalities—United 
States. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 60, 3–10. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013). State-Specific 
Healthy Life Expectancy at Age 65 Years — United States, 
2007–2009. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/mm6228a1.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). National 
Diabetes Statistics Report, 2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/national-
diabetes-report-web.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016a). Increase in 
Suicide in the United States, 1999–2014. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db241.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016b). Older Persons’ 
Health. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/older-
american-health.htm 

Central Intelligence Agency. (2019). The world factbook. Retrieved 
from https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world- 
factbook/fields/355rank.html 

Charness, N. (1981). Search in chess: Age and skill differences. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, 7, 467. 

Cheng, S. (2016). Cognitive reserve and the prevention of dementia: 
The role of physical and cognitive activities. Current Psychiatry 
Reports, 18(9), 85. 


Chmielewski, P., Boryslawski, K., & Strzelec, B. (2016). Contemporary 
views on human aging and longevity. Anthropological Review, 
79(2), 115-142. 

Cohen, D., & Eisdorfer, C. (2011). Integrated textbook of geriatric 
mental health. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Cohen, 
R. M. (2011). Chronic disease: The invisible illness. AARP. Retrieved 
from http://www.aarp.org/health/conditions-treatments/
info-06-2011/chronic-disease-invisible-illness.html 

Cohn, D., & Passel, J. (2018). A record 64 million Americans live in 
multigenerational households. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/05/a-
record-64-million-americans-live-in-multigenerational- 
households/ 

Craik, F. I., & Bialystok, E. (2006). Cognition through the lifespan: 
mechanisms of change. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 131–138. 

Dahlgren, D. J. (1998). Impact of knowledge and age on tip-of-the-
tongue rates. Experimental Aging Research, 24, 139-153. Dailey, S., 
& Cravedi, K. (2006). Osteoporosis information easily accessible 
NIH senior health. National Institute on Aging. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/newsroom/2006/01/osteoporosis-
information-easily-accessible-nihseniorhealth 

David, S., & Knight, B. G. (2008). Stress and coping among gay men: 
Age and ethnic differences. Psychology and Aging, 23, 62– 69. 
doi:10.1037/ 0882-7974.23.1.62 

Davidson, K. (2001). Late life widowhood, selfishness and new 
partnership choices: A gendered perspective. Ageing and Society, 
21, 297–317. 

Department of Defense. (2015). Defense advisory committee on 
women in the services. Retrieved from 
http://dacowits.defense.gov/Portals/48/Documents/Reports/
2015/Annual%20Report/
2015%20DACOWITS%20Annual%20Report_Final.pdf 

de Vries, B. (1996). The understanding of friendship: An adult life 
course perspective. In C. Magai & S. H. McFadden (Eds.), Handbook 


of emotion, adult development, and aging (pp. 249–268). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 

DiGiacomo, R. (2015). Road scholar, once elderhostel, targets boomers. 
Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/nextavenue/
2015/10/05/road-scholar-once-elderhostel-targets-
boomers/#fcb4f5b64449 

Dixon R. A., & Cohen, A. L. (2003). Cognitive development in 
adulthood. In R. M. Lerner, M. A. Easterbrokks & J. Misty (Eds.), 
Handbook of psychology (pp. 443-461). Hoboken NJ: John Wiley. 

Dixon, R. A., Rust, T. B., Feltmate, S. E., & See, S. K. (2007). Memory 
and aging: Selected research directions and application issues. 
Canadian Psychology, 48, 67-76. 

Dollemore, D. (2006, August 29). Publications. National Institute on 
Aging. Retrieved from http://www.nia.nih.gov/
HealthInformation/Publications?AgingUndertheMicroscope/ 

Economic Policy Institute. (2013). Financial security of elderly 
Americans at risk. Retrieved from http://www.epi.org/
publication/economic-security-elderly-americans-risk 

Elwert, F., & Christakis, N. (2008). The effect of widowhood on 
mortality by the causes of death of both spouses. American 
Journal of Public Health, 98, 2092-2098. 

Erber, J. T., & Szuchman, L. T. (2015). Great myths of aging. West 
Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons. Erikson, E. H. (1982). The life cycle 
completed. New York, NY: Norton & Company. 

Farrell, M. J. (2012). Age-related changes in the structure and 
function of brain regions involved in pain processing. Pain 
Medication, 2, S37-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4637.2011.01287.x. 

Federal Bureau of Investigation.üü (2014). Crime in the United States. 
Retrieved from https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the- u.s/2014/
crime-in-the-u.s.-2014/tables/expanded- homicide- data/
expanded_homicide_data_table_1_murder_victims_by_race_
ethnicity_and_sex_2014.xls 

Fingerman, K. L., & Birditt, K. S. (2011). Relationships between adults 
and their aging parents. In K. W. Schaie & S. I Willis (Eds.). 


Handbook of the psychology of aging (7th ed.) (pp 219-232). 
SanDiego: Elsevier Academic Press. 

Fischer, C. S. (1982). To dwell among friends: Personal networks in 
town and city. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Fjell, A. M., & Walhovd, K. B. (2010). Structural brain changes in 
aging: Courses, causes, and cognitive consequences. Reviews in 
the Neurosciences, 21, 187-222. 

Fox, S. (2004). Older Americans and the Internet. PEW Internet & 
American Life Project. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/report_display.asp?r_117 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Kim, H. J., Emlet, C. A., Muraco, A., 
Erosheva, E. A., Hoy-Ellis, C. P.,… Petry, H. (2011). The aging and 
health report: disparities and resilience among lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender older adults. Seattle, WA: Institute for 
Multigenerational Health. 

Garrett, B. (2015). Brain and behavior (4th ed.) Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. 

Gatz, M., Smyer, M. A., & DiGilio, D. A. (2016). Psychology’s 
contribution to the well-being of older Americans. American 
Psychologist, 71(4), 257-267. 

Gems, D. (2014). Evolution of sexually dimorphic longevity in 
humans. Aging, 6, 84-91. 

George, L.K. (2009). Still happy after all these years: research 
frontiers on subjective well-being in later life. Journal of 
Gerontology: Social Sciences, 65B (3), 331–339. doi:10.1093/
geronb/gbq006 

Githens, K., & Abramsohn, E. (2010). Still got it at seventy: Sexuality, 
aging, and HIV. Achieve, 1, 3-5. 

Glaser, K., Stuchbury, R., Tomassini, C., & Askham, J. (2008). The 
long-term consequences of partnership dissolution for support in 
later life in the Unites Kingdom. Ageing & Society, 28(3), 329-351. 

Gosney, T. A. (2011). Sexuality in older age: Essential considerations 
for healthcare professionals. Age Ageing, 40(5), 538-543. Göthe, 
K., Oberauer, K., & Kliegl, R. (2007). Age differences in dual-task 
performance after practice. Psychology and Aging, 22, 596-606. 


Goyer, A. (2010). More grandparents raising grandkids: New census 
data shows and increase in children being raised by extended 
family. AARP. Retrieved from http://www.aarp.org/
relationships/grandparenting/info-12- 2010/
more_grandparents_raising_grandchildren.html 

Graham, J. (2019, July 10). Why many seniors rate their health 
positively. The Chicago Tribune, p. 2. 

Greenfield, E. A., Vaillant, G. E., & Marks, N. F. (2009). Do formal 
religious participation and spiritual perceptions have 
independent linkages with diverse dimensions of psychological 
well-being? Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 50, 196-212. 

Guinness World Records. (2016). Oldest person (ever). Retrieved 
from http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/
search?term=oldest+person+%28ever%29 

Ha, J. H. (2010). The effects of positive and negative support from 
children on widowed older adults’ psychological adjustment: A 
longitudinal analysis. Gerontologist, 50, 471-481. 

Harkins, S. W., Price, D. D. & Martinelli, M. (1986). Effects of age on 
pain perception. Journal of Gerontology, 41, 58-63. 

Harvard School of Public Health. (2016). Antioxidants: Beyond the 
hype. Retrieved from https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/
nutritionsource/antioxidants 

Hasher, L. & Zacks, R. T. (1988). Working memory, comprehension, 
and aging: A review and a new view. In G.H. Bower (Ed.), The 
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, (Vol. 22, pp. 193–225). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press. 

He, W., Goodkind, D., & Kowal, P. (2016). An aging world: 2015. 
International Population Reports. U.S. Census Bureau. 

He, W., Sengupta, M., Velkoff, V., & DeBarros, K. (2005.). U. S. Census 
Bureau, Current Popluation Reports, P23-209, 65+ in the United 
States: 2005 (United States, U. S. Census Bureau). Retrieved from 
http://www.census.gov/prod/1/pop/p23- 190/p23-190.html 

Hendricks, J., & Cutler, S. J. (2004). Volunteerism and socioemotional 
selectivity in later life. Journal of Gerontology, 59B, S251-S257. 

Henry, J. D., MacLeod, M. S., Phillips, L. H., & Crawford, J. R. (2004). 


A meta-analytic review of prospective memory and aging. 
Psychology and Aging, 19, 27–39. 

Heron, M. (2018). Deaths: Leading causes 2016. National Vital 
Statistics Reports, 67(6), 1-77. 

Hillman, J., & Hinrichsen, G. A. (2014). Promoting and affirming 
competent practice with older lesbian and gay adults. Professional 
Psychology: Research and Practice, 45(4), 169-277. 

Hinze, S. W., Lin, J., & Andersson, T. E. (2012). Can we capture the 
intersections? Older black women, education, and health. 
Women’s Health Issues, 22, e91-e98. 

Hirokawa K., Utsuyama M., Hayashi, Y., Kitagawa, M., Makinodan, T., 
& Fulop, T. (2013). Slower immune system aging in women versus 
men in the Japanese population. Immunity & Ageing, 10(1), 19. 

Holland, K. (2014). Why America’s campuses are going gray?
Retrieved from http://www.cnbc.com/2014/08/28/why-
americas- campuses-are-going-gray.html 

Holmes, T. H., & Rahe, R. H. (1967). The social readjustment rating 
scale. Journal of psychosomatic research, 11, 213. 

Holth, J., Fritschi, S., Wang, C., Pedersen, N., Cirrito, J., Mahan, 
T.,…Holtzman, D. 2019). The sleep-wake cycle regulates brain 
interstitial fluid tau in mice and CSF tau in humans. Science, 
363(6429), 880-884. 

Hooyman, N. R., & Kiyak, H. A. (2011). Social gerontology: A 
multidisciplinary perspective (9th Ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson 
James, J. B., Matz-Costa, C., & Smyer, M. A. (2016). Retirement 
security: It’s not just about the money. American Psychologist,
71(4), 334-344. 

Jarrett, C. (2015). Great myths of the brain. West Sussex, UK: John 
Wiley & Sons. 

Jefferies, L. N., Roggeveen, A. B., Ennis, J. T., Bennett, P. J., Sekuler, A. 
B., & Dilollo, V. (2015). On the time course of attentional focusing 
in older adults. Psychological Research, 79, 28-41. 

Jensen, M. P., Moore, M. R., Bockow, T. B., Ehde, D. M., & Engel, J. 
M. (2011). Psychosocial factors and adjustment to persistent pain 
in persons with physical disabilities: A systematic review. Archives 


of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 92, 146–160. doi:10.1016/
j.apmr.2010 .09.021 

Jin, K. (2010). Modern biological theories of aging. Aging and Disease, 
1, 72-74. 

Kahana, E., Bhatta, T., Lovegreen, L. D., Kahana, B., & Midlarsky, 
E. (2013). Altruism, helping, and volunteering: Pathways to well-
being in late life. Journal of Aging and Health, 25(1), 159-187. 

Kahn, R. L., & Antonucci, T. C. (1980). Convoys over the life course: 
Attachment, roles, and social support. In P. B. Baltes & O. G. Brim 
(Eds.), Life-span development and behavior (pp. 253–286). New 
York: Academic Press. 

Kane, M. (2008). How are sexual behaviors of older women and older 
men perceived by human service students? Journal of Social Work 
Education, 27(7), 723-743. 

Karraker, A., DeLamater, J., & Schwartz, C. R. (2011). Sexual frequency 
decline from midlife to later life. The Journal of Gerontology, 
Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66B, 502-512. 

Kaskie, B., Imhof, S., Cavanaugh, J., & Culp, K. (2008). Civic 
engagement as a retirement role for aging Americans. The 
Gerontologist, 48, 368-377. 

Kemp, E. A., & Kemp, J. E. (2002). Older couples: New romances: 
Finding and keeping love in later life. Berkeley, CA: Celestial Arts. 

King, V., & Scott, M. E. (2005). A comparison of cohabitating 
relationships among older and younger adults. Journal of 
Marriage and Family, 67(2), 271-285. 

Kolb, B., & Whishaw, I. Q. (2011). An introduction to brain and 
behavior (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Worth Publishers. 

Kosberg, J. I. (2014). Reconsidering assumptions regarding men an 
elder abuse perpetrators and as elder abuse victims. Journal of 
Elder Abuse and Neglect, 26, 207-222. 

Kowalski, S. D., & Bondmass, M. D. (2008). Physiological and 
psychological symptoms of grief in widows. Research in Nursing 
and Health, 31(1), 23-30. 

Kramer, A. F. & Erickson, K. I. (2007). Capitalizing on cortical 


plasticity: The influence of physical activity on cognition and 
brain function. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 342–348. 

Lang, F. R., & Schütze, Y. (2002). Adult children’s supportive 
behaviors and older adults’ subjective well-being: A 
developmental perspective on intergenerational relationships. 
Journal of Social Issues, 58, 661-680. 

Laslett, P. (1989). A fresh map of life: The emergence of the third age. 
London, UK: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 

Lee, S.B., Oh, J.G., Park, J.H., Choi, S.P., & Wee, J.H. (2018). Differences 
in youngest-old, middle-old, and oldest-old patients who visit 
the emergency department. Clinical and Experimental Emergency 
Medicine, 5(4), 249-255. 

Lee, S. J., Steinman, M., & Tan, E. J. (2011). Volunteering, driving 
status, and mortality in U.S. retirees. Journal of the American 
Geriatric Society, 59 (2), 274-280. doi: 10.1111/
j.1532-5415.2010.03265x 

Lemon, F. R., Bengston, V. L., & Peterson, J. A. (1972). An exploration 
of activity theory of aging: Activity types and life satisfaction 
among in-movers to a retirement community. Journal of 
Geronotology, 27, 511-523. 

Levant, S., Chari, K., & DeFrances, C. J. (2015). Hospitalizations for 
people aged 85 and older in the United States 2000-2010. Centers 
for Disease Control. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
data/databriefs/db182.pdf 

Levy, B. (2009). Stereotype embodiment: A psychosocial approach to 
aging. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18, 332-336. 

Lichtenberg, P. A. (2016). Financial exploitation, financial capacity, 
and Alzheimer’s disease. American Psychologist, 71(4), 312-320. 

Lin, I. F. (2008). Consequences of parental divorce for adult 
children’s support of their frail parents. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 70(1), 113-128. 

Livingston, G. (2019). Americans 60 and older are spending more 
time in front of their screens than a decade ago. Retrieved from: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/06/18/


americans-60-and-older-are-spending-more-time-in-front-of- 
their-screens-than-a-decade-ago/ 

Luo, L., & Craik, F. I. M. (2008). Aging and memory: A cognitive 
approach. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 53, 346-353. Martin, L. 
J. (2014). Age changes in the senses. MedlinePlus. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/004013.htm 

Martin, P., Poon, L.W., & Hagberg, B. (2011). Behavioral factors of 
longevity. Journal of Aging Research, 2011/2012, 1–207. 

Mayer, J. (2016). MyPlate for older adults. Nutrition Resource Center 
on Nutrition and Aging and the U. S. Department of Agriculture 
Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging and Tufts University. 
Retrieved from http://nutritionandaging.org/my-plate-for-
older-adults/ 

McCormak A., Edmondson-Jones M., Somerset S., & Hall D. (2016) 
A systematic review of the reporting of tinnitus prevalence and 
severity. Hearing Research, 337, 70-79. 

McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1988). Physiological resilience among 
widowed men and women: A 10 year follow-up study of a national 
sample. Journal of Social Issues, 44(3), 129-142. 

McDonald, L., & Robb, A. L. (2004). The economic legacy of divorce 
and separation for women in old age. Canadian Journal on Aging, 
23, 83-97. 

McEntarfer, E. (2018). Older people working longer, earning more. 
Retrieved from http://thepinetree.net/new/?p=58015 

Meegan, S. P., & Berg, C. A. (2002). Contexts, functions, forms, and 
processes of collaborative everyday problem solving in older 
adulthood. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 26(1), 
6-15. doi: 10.1080/01650250143000283 

Molton, I. R., & Terrill, A. L. (2014). Overview of persistent pain in 
older adults. American Psychologist, 69(2), 197-207. Natanson, H. 
(2019, July 14). To reduce risk of Alzheimer’s play chess and ditch 
red meat. The Chicago Tribune, p. 1. 

National Council on Aging. (2019). Healthy aging facts. Retrieved 
from https://www.ncoa.org/news/resources-for-reporters/
get- the-facts/healthy-aging-facts/ 


National Council on Alcoholism and Drug. (2015). Alcohol, drug 
dependence and seniors. Retrieved from https://www.ncadd.org/
about-addiction/seniors/alcohol-drug-dependence-and-
seniors 

National Eye Institute. (2016a). Cataract. Retrieved from 
https://nei.nih.gov/health/cataract/ 

National Eye Institute. (2016b). Glaucoma. Retrieved from 
https://nei.nih.gov/glaucoma/ 

National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. (2006). Make room for all: 
Diversity, cultural competency and discrimination in an aging 
America. Washington, DC: The Policy Institute of the National Gay 
and Lesbian Task Force. 

National Institutes of Health. (2011). What is alpha-1 antitrypsin 
(AAT) deficiency? Retrieved from http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
health/health-topics/topics/aat 

National Institutes of Health. (2013). Hypothyroidism. Retrieved 
from https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health- 
topics/endocrine/hypothyroidism/Pages/fact-sheet.aspx 

National Institutes of Health. (2014a). Aging changes in hormone 
production. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/
article/004000.htm 

National Institutes of Health. (2014b). Cataracts. Retrieved from 
https://medlineplus.gov/cataract.html 

National Institutes of Health. (2014c). Prescription and illicit drug 
abuse. NIH Senior Health: Built with you in mind. Retrieved from 
http://nihseniorhealth.gov/drugabuse/illicitdrugabuse/01.html 

National Institutes of Health. (2015a). Macular degeneration. 
Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/
maculardegeneration.html 

National Institutes of Health. (2015b). Pain: You can get help. 
Retrieved from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/
pain 

National Institutes of Health. (2016). Quick statistics about hearing. 
Retrieved from https://www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/statistics/
quick-statistics-hearing 


National Institutes of Health: Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases. (2014). Arthritis and rheumatic diseases. Retrieved from 
https://www.niams.nih.gov/Health_Info/Arthritis/
arthritis_rheumatic.asp 

National Institutes of Health: Senior Health. (2013). What is COPD?
Retrieved from http://nihseniorhealth.gov/copd/whatiscopd/
01.html 

National Institutes of Health: Senior Health. (2015). What is 
osteoporosis? http://nihseniorhealth.gov/osteoporosis/
whatisosteoporosis/01.html 

National Institutes of Health: Senior Health (2016a). Problems with 
smell. Retrieved from https://nihseniorhealth.gov/
problemswithsmell/aboutproblemswithsmell/01.html 

National Institutes of Health: Senior Health (2016b). Problems with 
taste. Retrieved from https://nihseniorhealth.gov/
problemswithtaste/aboutproblemswithtaste/01.html 

National Institute on Aging. (2011a). Biology of aging: Research today 
for a healthier tomorrow. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/biology-aging/
preface 

National Institute on Aging. (2011b). Baltimore Longitudinal Study 
of Aging Home Page. (2011). Retrieved from 
http://www.grc.nia.nih.gov/branches/blsa/blsa.htm 

National Institute on Aging. (2012). Heart Health. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/heart-health 

National Institute on Aging. (2013). Sexuality later in life. Retrieved 
from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/sexuality- 
later-life 

National Institute on Aging. (2015a). The Basics of Lewy Body 
Dementia. Retrieved from https://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/
publication/lewy-body-dementia/basics-lewy-body-dementia 

National Institute on Aging. (2015b). Global Health and Aging. 
Retrieved from https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/publication/
global-health-and-aging/living-longer 


National Institute on Aging. (2015c). Hearing loss. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/hearing-loss 

National Institute on Aging. (2015d). Humanity’s aging. Retrieved 
from https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/publication/global- 
health-and-aging/humanitys-aging 

National Institute on Aging. (2015e). Shingles. Retrieved from 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/shingles 

National Institute on Aging. (2015f). Skin care and aging. Retrieved 
from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/skin-care- 
and-aging 

National Institute on Aging. (2016). A good night’s sleep. Retrieved 
from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/good- nights-
sleep 

National Library of Medicine. (2014). Aging changes in body shape. 
Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/
003998.htm 

National Library of Medicine. (2019). Aging changes in the heart and 
blood vessels. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/
article/004006.htm 

National Osteoporosis Foundation. (2016). Preventing fractures. 
Retrieved from https://www.nof.org/prevention/preventing- 
fractures/ 

National Sleep Foundation. (2009). Aging and sleep. Retrieved from 
https://sleepfoundation.org/sleep-topics/aging- and-sleep 

Nelson, T. D. (2016). Promoting healthy aging by confronting ageism. 
American Psychologist, 71(4), 276-282. 

Novotney, A. (2019). Social isolation: It could kill you. Monitor on 
Psychology, 50(5), 33-37. 

Office on Women’s Health. (2010a). Raising children again. Retrieved 
from http://www.womenshealth.gov/aging/caregiving/raising-
children-again.html 

Office on Women’s Health. (2010b). Sexual health. Retrieved from 
http://www.womenshealth.gov/aging/sexual-health/ 

Olanow, C. W., & Tatton, W. G. (1999). Etiology and pathogenesis of 
Parkinson’s disease. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 22, 123-144. 


Ortman, J. M., Velkoff, V. A., & Hogan, H. (2014). An aging nation: 
The older population in the United States. United States Census. 
Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/prod/2014pubs/
p25-1140.pdf 

Overstreet, L. (2006). Unhappy birthday: Stereotypes in late 
adulthood. Unpublished manuscript, Texas Woman’s University. 

Owsley, C., Rhodes, L. A., McGwin Jr., G., Mennemeyer, S. T., 
Bregantini, M., Patel, N., … Girkin, C. A. (2015). Eye care quality 
and accessibility improvement in the community (EQUALITY) for 
adults at risk for glaucoma: Study rationale and design. 
International Journal for Equity in Health, 14, 1-14. DOI 10:1186/
s12939-015-0213-8 

Papernow, P. L. (2018). Recoupling in midlife and beyond: From love 
at last to not so fast. Family Processes, 57(1), 52-69. Park, D. C. & 
Gutchess, A. H. (2000). Cognitive aging and everyday life. In D.C. 
Park & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Cognitive Aging: A Primer (pp. 217–232). 
New York: Psychology Press. 

Park, D. C., & Reuter-Lorenz, P. (2009). The adaptive brain: Aging 
and neurocognitive scaffolding. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 
173-196. 

Pew Research Center. (2011). Fighting poverty in a tough economy. 
Americans move in with their relatives. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files.2011/
10.Multigenerationsl-Households-Final1.pdf 

Pilkington, P. D., Windsor, T. D., & Crisp, D. A. (2012). Volunteerism 
and subjective well-being in midlife and older adults: The role 
of supportive social networks. Journal of Gerontology Series B: 
Psychological and Social Sciences, 67 B (2), 249- 260. Doi:10.1093/
geronb/grb154. 

Quinn, J. F., & Cahill, K. E. (2016). The new world of retirement 
income security in America. American Psychologist, 71(4), 321-333. 

Resnikov, S., Pascolini, D., Mariotti, S. P., & Pokharel, G. P. (2004). 
Global data on visual impairment in the year 2002. Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization, 82, 844-851. 

Rhodes, M. G., Castel, A. D., & Jacoby, L. L. (2008). Associative 


recognition of face pairs by younger and older adults: The role of 
familiarity-based processing. Psychology and Aging, 23, 239-249. 

Riediger, M., Freund, A.M., & Baltes, P.B. (2005). Managing life 
through personal goals: Intergoal facilitation and intensity of goal 
pursuit in younger and older adulthood. Journals of Gerontology, 
60B, P84-P91. 

Roberto, K. A. (2016). The complexities of elder abuse. American 
Psychologist, 71(4), 302-311. 

Robin, R. C. (2010). Grown-up, but still irresponsible. New York 
Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/
10weekinreview/10rabin.html>. 

Robins, R.W., & Trzesniewski, K.H. (2005). Self-esteem development 
across the lifespan. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14(3), 158-162. DOI: 10.1111/j.0963- 7214.2005.00353x 

Rowe, J. W. & Kahn, R. L. (1997). Successful aging. The Gerontologist, 
37(4), 433–440. 

Rubinstein, R.L. (2002). The third age. In R.S. Weiss & S.A. Bass (Eds.), 
Challenges of the third age; Meaning and purpose in later life (pp. 
29-40). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Ruckenhauser, G., Yazdani, F., & Ravaglia, G. (2007). Suicide in old 
age: Illness or autonomous decision of the will? Archives of 
Gerontology and Geriatrics, 44(6), S355-S358. 

Saiidi, U. (2019). US life expectancy has been declining. Here’s why. 
Retrieved from https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/09/us-life- 
expectancy-has-been-declining-heres-why.html 

Salthouse, T. A. (1984). Effects of age and skill in typing. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 345. 

Salthouse, T. A. (1996). The processing-speed theory of adult age 
differences in cognition. Psychological Review, 103, 403-428. 
Salthouse, T. A. (2004). What and when of cognitive aging. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 13(4), 140-144. 

Salthouse, T. A., & Babcock, R. L. (1991). Decomposing adult age 
differences in working memory. Developmental Psychology, 27, 
763-776. 

Schacter, D. L., Church, B. A., & Osowiecki, D. O. (1994). Auditory 


priming in elderly adults: Impairment of voice-specific implicit 
memory. Memory, 2, 295-323. 

Schaie, K. W. (1994). The course of adult intellectual development. 
American Psychologist, 49, 304-311. 

Schick, V., Herbenick, D., Reece, M., Sanders, S. A., Dodge, B., 
Middlestadt, S. E., & Fortenberry, J. D. (2010). Sexual behaviors, 
condom use, and sexual health of Americans over 50: Implications 
for sexual health promotion for older adults. Journal of Sexual 
Medicine, 7(5), 315-329. 

Schwartz, B. L. (2011). Memory: Foundations and applications. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Scott, P. J. (2015). Save the 
Males. Men’s Health. Retrieved from http://www.menshealth.com 

Shmerling, R. H. (2016). Why men often die earlier than women. 
Harvard Health Publications. Retrieved from 
http://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/why-men-often-die-
earlier-than-women-201602199137 

Shokri-Kojori, E., Wang, G., Wiers, C., Demiral, S., Guo, M., Kim, 
S.,…Volkow, N. (2018). β-amyloid accumulation in the human brain 
after one night of sleep deprivation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 115(17), 
4483-4488. 

Singer, T., Verhaeghen, P., Ghisletta, P., Lindenberger, U., & Baltes, 
P.B. (2003). The fate of cognition in very old age: Six-year 
longitudinal findings in the Berlin Aging Study (BASE). Psychology 
and Aging, 18, 318-331. 

Siriwardena, A. N., Qureshi, A., Gibson, S., Collier, S., & Lathamn, M. 
(2006). GP’s attitudes to benzodiazepine and “z-drug” prescribing: 
A barrier to implementation of evidence and guidance on 
hypnotics. British Journal of General Practice, 56, 964-967. 

Smith, J. (2000). The fourth age: A period of psychological mortality? 
Max Planck Forum, 4, 75-88. 

Social Security Administration. (2016). Retirement planner: Benefits 
by year of birth. Retrieved from https://www.ssa.gov/planners/
retire/agereduction.html 


Sohn, H. (2015). Health insurance and divorce: Does having your own 
insurance matter? Journal of Marriage and Family, 77, 982-995. 

Spaniol, J., Madden, D. J., & Voss, A. (2006). A diffusion model 
analysis of adult age differences in episodic and semantic long- 
term memory retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1). 
101-117. 

Staudinger, U. M., & Gluck, J. (2011). Psychological wisdom research: 
Commonalities and differences in a growing field. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 62, 215–241. 

Stepler, R. (2016a). Gender gap in share of older adults living alone 
narrows. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/02/18/1-gender-gap-in-
share-of-older-adults-living-alone-narrows/ 

Stepler, R. (2016b). Living arrangements of older adults by gender. 
Pew Research Center Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/02/18/2-living-
arrangements-of-older-americans-by-gender/ 

Stepler, R. (2016c). Smaller share of women 65 or older are living 
alone. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/02/18/smaller-share-
of-women-ages-65-and-older-are-living-alone/ 

Stepler, R. (2016d). Well-being of older adults living alone. Pew 
Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/02/18/3-well-being-of-
older-adults-living-alone/ 

Stepler, R. (2016e). World’s centenarian population projected to 
grow eightfold by 2050. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/04/21/worlds-
centenarian-population-projected-to-grow-eightfold-by- 2050/ 

Stoller, E. P., & Longino, C. F. (2001). “Going home” or “leaving 
home”? The impact of person and place ties on anticipated 
counterstream migration. Gerontologist, 41, 96-102. 

Strait, J.B., & Lakatta, E.G. (2012). Aging-associated cardiovascular 
changes and their relationship to heart failure. Heart Failure 
Clinics, 8(1), 143-164. 


Strine, T. W., Hootman, J. M., Chapman, D. P., Okoro, C. A., & Balluz, 
L. (2005). Health-related quality of life, health risk behaviors, and 
disability among adults with pain-related activity difficulty. 
American Journal of Public Health, 95, 2042–2048. doi:10.2105/
AJPH.2005 .066225 

Strough, J., Hicks, P. J., Swenson, L. M., Cheng, S., & Barnes, K. 
A. (2003). Collaborative everyday problem solving: Interpersonal 
relationships and problem dimensions. International Journal of 
Aging and Human Development, 56, 43- 66. 

Subramanian, S. V., Elwert, F., & Christakis, N. (2008). Widowhood 
and mortality among the elderly: The modifying role of 
neighborhood concentration of widowed individuals. Social 
Science and Medicine, 66, 873-884. 

Sullivan, A. R., & Fenelon, A. (2014). Patterns of widowhood mortality. 
Journal of Gerontology Series B: Psychological and Social Sciences, 
69B, 53-62. 

Tales, A., Muir, J. L., Bayer, A., & Snowden, R. J. (2002). Spatial shifts 
in visual attention in normal aging and dementia of the Alzheimer 
type. Neuropsychologia, 40, 2000-2012. 

Taylor, R., Chatters, L. & Leving, J. (2004). Religion in the lives of 
African Americans. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 

Tennstedt, S., Morris, J., Unverzagt, F., Rebok, G., Willis, S., Ball, 
K., & Marsiske, M. (2006). ACTIVE: Advanced Cognitive Training 
for Independent and Vital Elderly Clinical Trial. Clinical Trials 
Database and Worldwide Listings. Retrieved from 
http://www.clinicaltrialssearch.org/active-advanced-cognitive-
training-for-independent-and-vital-elderly- nct00298558.html 

Tentori, K., Osherson, D., Hasher, L., & May, C. (2001). Wisdom and 
aging: Irrational preferences in college students but not older 
adults. Cognition, 81, B87–B96. 

Thornbury, J. M., & Mistretta, C. M. (1981). Tactile sensitivity as a 
function of age. Journal of Gerontology, 36(1), 34-39. 

Tobin, M., K., Musaraca, K., Disouky, A., Shetti, A., Bheri, A. Honer, W. 
G.,…Lazarov, O. (2019). Human hippocampal neurogenesis persists 


in aged adults and Alzheimer’s disease patients. Cell Stem Cell, 
24(6), 974-982. 

Tsang, A., Von Korff, M., Lee, S., Alonso, J., Karam, E., Angermeyer, M. 
C., . . . Watanabe, M. (2008). Common persistent pain conditions in 
developed and developing countries: Gender and age differences 
and comorbidity with depression- anxiety disorders. The Journal 
of Pain, 9, 883–891. doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2008.05.005 

United States Census Bureau. (2012). 2012 national population 
projections. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from 
https://www.census.gov/population/projections/data/
natiobnal/2012.html 

United States Census Bureau. (2014a). American Community Survey, 
2014 Estimates: table B10001. Retrieved from at 
http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/
productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_14_5YR_B10001&prodType=t able 

United States Census Bureau. (2014b). U. S. population projections: 
2014-2060. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/population/
projections/data/natiobnal/2014.html 

United States Department of Health and Human Services. (2012). 
A profile of older Americans: 2012. Retrieved from 
http://www.aoa.gov/Aging_Statistics/Profile/2012/docs/
2012profile.pdf 

United States Government Accountability Office. (2011). Income 
security: Older adults and the 2007-2009 recession. 

Washington, DC: Author. United States, National Center for Health 
Statistics. (2002). National Vital Statistics Report, 50(16). Retrieved 
May 7, 2011, from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/
LCWK1_2000.pdf 

United States National Library of Medicine. (2019). Aging changes 
in hair and nails. 
Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/
article/004005.htm 

United States Senate Commission on Long-Term Care. (2013). 
Report to the Congress. Washington, DC: U. S. Government 
Printing Office. 

Vespa, J. & Schondelmyer, E. (2014). A gray revolution in living 


arrangements. Retrieved from http://blogs.census.gov/2015/07/
14/a-gray-revolution-in-living-arrangements/ 

Viña, J., Borrás, C., Gambini, J., Sastre, J., Pallardó, F.V. (2005). Why 
females live longer than males: Control of longevity by sex 
hormones. Science of Aging Knowledge Environment, 23, 17. 

Washington University School of Medicine. (2019). Alzheimer’s 
missing link ID’d, answering what tips brain’s decline. Retrieved 
from https://medicalxpress.com/news/2019-06-alzheimer-link-
idd-brain-decline.html 

Wasscher, E., Schneider, D., Hoffman, S., Beste, C., & Sänger, J. (2012). 
When compensation fails: Attentional deficits in healthy ageing 
caused by visual distraction. Neuropsychologia, 50, 3185-31-92. 

Watson, W. K., & Stelle, C. (2011). Dating for older women: 
Experiences and meanings of dating in later life. Journal of Women 
and Aging, 23, 263-275. 

Webmd. (2016). Sarcopenia with aging. Retrieved from 
http://www.webmd.com/healthy- aging/sarcopenia-with-aging 

Wilcox, B. J. Wilcox, D. C., & Ferrucci, L. (2008). Secrets of healthy 
aging and longevity from exceptional survivors around the globe: 
Lessons from octogenarians to supercentenarians. Journal of 
Gerontology, 63(11), 1181-1185. 

Williamson, E. M., & Evans, F. J. (2000). Cannabinoids in clinical 
practice. Drugs, 60, 1303-1314. World Health Organization. (2019). 
World health statistics 2019. Retrieved from: https://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/handle/10665/324835/9789241565707-eng.pdf 

Wright, K. B., & Query, J. L. (2004). Online support and older adults: A 
theoretical examination of benefits and limitations of computer-
mediated support networks for older adults and possible health 
outcomes. In J. Nussbaum & J. Coupland (Eds.), Handbook of 
communication and aging research (2nd ed., pp. 499–519). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Wrzus, C., Hanel, M., Wagner, J., & Neyer, F. J. (2013). Social network 
changes and life events across the lifespan: A meta- analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 139(1), 53-80. 

Wu, C., Odden, M. C., Fisher, G. G., & Stawski, R. S. (2016). Association 


of retirement age with mortality: a population-based longitudinal 
study among older adults in the USA. Journal of Epidemiology and 
Community Health. doi:10.1136/jech- 2015-207097 

Wu, Z., & Schimmele, C. M. (2007). Uncoupling in late life. 
Generations, 31(3), 41-46. 

Xu, J., Murphy, S. L., Kochanek, K. D., & Bastian, B. A. (2016). Deaths: 
Final data for 2013. National Vital Statistics Report, 64(2), 1-119. 

Youdin, R. (2016). Psychology of Aging 101. New York: Springer 
Publishing. 

Zahodne, L. B., Stern, Y., & Manly, J. (2015). Differing effects of 
education on cognitive decline in diverse elders with low versus 
high educational attainment. Neuropsychology, 29(4), 649-657. 

Attribution 

Adapted from Chapter 9 from Lifespan Development: A 
Psychological Perspective Second Edition by Martha Lally and 
Suzanne Valentine-French under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 unported license. 


Chapter 30: Psychosocial 
Development in Late 
Adulthood 

Chapter 30 Learning Objectives 

Explain the stereotypes of those in late adulthood 
and how it impacts their lives 
Summarize Erikson’s eight psychosocial tasks of 
integrity vs. despair 
Explain how self-concept and self-esteem affect 
those in late adulthood 
Identify sources of despair and regret 
Describe paths to integrity, including the activity, 
socioemotional selectivity, and convoy theories 
Describe the continuation of generativity in late 
adulthood 
Describe the relationships those in late adulthood 
have with their children and other family members 
Describe singlehood, marriage, widowhood, 
divorce, and remarriage in late adulthood 
Describe the different types of residential living in 
late adulthood 



Describe friendships in late life 
Explain concerns experienced by those in late 
adulthood, such as abuse and mental health issues 
Explain how those in late adulthood use strategies 
to compensate for losses 


Ageism 

Stereotypes of people in late adulthood lead many to assume that 
aging automatically brings poor physical health and mental decline. 
These stereotypes are reflected in everyday conversations, the 
media, and even in greeting cards (Overstreet, 2006). Age is not 
revered in the United States, and so laughing about getting older 
in birthday cards is one way to get relief. The negative attitudes 
people have about those in late adulthood are examples of ageismor prejudice based on age. The term ageism was first used in 1969, 
and according to Nelson (2016), ageism remains one of the most 
institutionalized forms of prejudice today. 


Nelson (2016) reviewed the research on ageism and concluded that 
when older individuals believed their culture’s negative stereotypes 
about those who are old, their memory and cognitive skills declined. 
In contrast, older individuals in cultures, such as China, that held 
more positive views on aging did not demonstrate cognitive deficits. 
It appears that when one agrees with the stereotype, it becomes a 
self-fulfilling prophecy 
or the belief in one’s ability results in actions 
that make it come true. 
Being the target of stereotypes can adversely 
affect individuals’ performance on tasks because they worry they will 
confirm the cultural stereotypes. This is known as stereotype threat, 
and it was originally used to explain race and gender differences in 
academic achievement (Gatz et al., 2016). Stereotype threat research 
has demonstrated that older adults who internalize the aging 
stereotypes will exhibit worse memory performance, worse physical 
performance, and reduced self-efficacy (Levy, 2009). 

In terms of physically taking care of themselves, those who believe 
in negative stereotypes are less likely to engage in preventative 


health behaviors, less likely to recover from illnesses, and more 
likely to feel stress and anxiety, which can adversely affect immune 
functioning and cardiovascular health (Nelson, 2016). Additionally, 
individuals who attribute their health problems to their age had a 
higher death rate. Similarly, doctors who believe that illnesses are 
just a natural consequence of aging are less likely to have older 
adults participate in clinical trials or receive life-sustaining 
treatment. In contrast, those older adults who possess positive and 
optimistic views of aging are less likely to have physical or mental 
health problems and are more likely to live longer. Removing 
societal stereotypes about aging and helping older adults reject 
those notions of aging is another way to promote health and life 
expectancy among the elderly. 

Minority status: Older minority adults accounted for 
approximately 21% of the U. S. population in 2012 but are expected 
to reach 39% of the population in 2050 (U. S. Census Bureau, 2012). 
Unfortunately, racism is a further concern for minority elderly 
already suffering from ageism. Older adults who are African 
American, Mexican American, and Asian American experience 
psychological problems that are often associated with 
discrimination by the White majority (Youdin, 2016). Ethnic 
minorities are also more likely to become sick, but less likely to 
receive medical intervention. Older, minority women can face 
ageism, racism, and sexism often referred to as triple jeopardy(Hinze, Lin, & Andersson, 2012), which can adversely affect their life 
in late adulthood. 

Poverty rates: According to Quinn and Cahill (2016), the poverty 
rate for older adults varies based on gender, marital status, race, 
and age. Women aged 65 or older were 70% more likely to be poor 
than men, and older women aged 80 and above have higher levels 
of poverty than those younger. Married couples are less likely to 
be poor than nonmarried men and women, and poverty is more 
prevalent among older racial minorities. In 2012 the poverty rates 
for White older men (5.6%) and White older women (9.6%) were 


lower than for Black older men (14%), Black older women (21%), 
Hispanic older men (19%), and Hispanic older women (22%). 

Living Arrangements 
Do those in late adulthood primarily live 
alone? No. In 2017, of those 65 years of age and older, approximately 
72% of men and 48% of women lived with their spouse or partner 
(Administration on Aging, 2017). Between 1900 and 1990 the number 
of older adults living alone increased, most likely due to 
improvements in health and longevity during this time (see Figure 
9.40). Since 1990 the number of older adults living alone has 
declined, because of older women more likely to be living with their 
spouse or children (Stepler, 2016c). Women continue to make up 
the majority of older adults living alone in the U.S., although that 
number has dropped from those living alone in 1990 (Stepler, 2016a). 
Older women are more likely to be unmarried, living with children, 
with other relatives or non-relatives. Older men are more likely 
to be living alone than they were in 1990, although older men are 
more likely to reside with their spouses. The rise in divorce among 
those in late adulthood, along with the drop-in remarriage rate, has 
resulted in slightly more older men living alone today than in the 
past (Stepler, 2016c). 

Older adults who live alone report feeling more financially strapped 
than do those living with others (Stepler, 2016d). According to a Pew 
Research Center Survey, only 33% of those living alone reported 
they were living comfortably, while nearly 49% of those living with 
others said they were living comfortably. Similarly, 12% of those 
living alone, but only 5% of those living with others, reported that 
they lacked money for basic needs (Stepler, 2016d). 


Do those in late adulthood primarily live with family members?
No, but according to the Pew Research Center, there has been 
an increase in the number of families living in multigenerational 
housing; that is three generations living together than in previous 
generations (Cohn & Passel, 2018). In 2016, a record 64 million 
Americans, or 20% of the population, lived in a house with at least 
two adult generations. However, ethnic differences are noted in the 
percentage of multigenerational households with Hispanic (27%), 
Black (26%), and Asian (29%) families living together in greater 


older adults wish to live independently for as long as they are able. 
numbers than White families (16%). Consequently, the majority of 

Do those in late adulthood move after retirement? No. 
According to Erber and Szuchman (2015), the majority of those in 
late adulthood remains in the same location, and often in the same 
house, where they lived before retiring. Although some younger late 
adults (65-74 years) may relocate to warmer climates, once they 
are older (75-84 years) they often return to their home states to 
be closer to adult children (Stoller & Longino, 2001). Despite the 
previous trends, however, the recent housing crisis has kept those 
in late adulthood in their current suburban locations because they 
are unable to sell their homes (Erber & Szuchman, 2015). 

Do those in late adulthood primarily live in institutions? No. 
Only a small portion (3.2%) of adults older than 65 lived in an 
institution in 2015 (United States Department of Health and Human 
Services, 2015). However, as individuals increase in age the 
percentage of those living in institutions, such as a nursing home, 
also increases. Specifically: 1% of those 65-74, 3% of those 75-84, and 
10% of those 85 years and older lived in an institution in 2015. Due 
to the increasing number of baby boomers reaching late adulthood, 
the number of people who will depend on long-term care is 
expected to rise from 12 million in 2010 to 27 million in 2050 (United 
States Senate Commission on Long-Term Care, 2013). To meet this 
higher demand for services, a focus on the least restrictive care 
alternatives has resulted in a shift toward home and community-
based care instead of placement in a nursing home (Gatz et al., 2016). 

Erikson: Integrity vs. Despair 

How do people cope with old age? According to Erikson, the last 
psychosocial stage is Integrity vs. Despair. This stage includes, “a 
retrospective accounting of one’s life to date; how much one embraces 
life as having been well lived, as opposed to regretting missed 


opportunities,” (Erikson, 1982, p. 112). 
Those in late adulthood need 
to achieve both the acceptance of their life and the inevitability 
of their death (Barker, 2016). This stage includes finding meaning 
in one’s life and accepting one’s accomplishments, but also 
acknowledging what in life has not gone as hoped. It is also feeling a 
sense of contentment and accepting others’ deficiencies, including 
those of their parents. This acceptance will lead to integrity, but if 
elders are unable to achieve this acceptance, they may experience 
despair. Bitterness and resentment in relationships and life events 
can lead one to despair at the end of life. According to Erikson 
(1982), successful completion of this stage leads to wisdom in late 
life. 

Erikson’s theory was the first to propose a lifespan approach to 
development, and it has encouraged the belief that older adults 
still have developmental needs. Prior to Erikson’s theory, older 
adulthood was seen as a time of social and leisure restrictions and a 
focus primarily on physical needs (Barker, 2016). The current focus 
on aging well by keeping healthy and active helps to promote 
integrity. There are many avenues for those in late adulthood to 
remain vital members of society, and they will be explored next. 

Staying Active: Many older adults want to remain active and work 
toward replacing opportunities lost with new ones. Those who 
prefer to keep themselves busy demonstrate the Activity Theory, 
which states that greater satisfaction with one’s life occurs with those 
who remain active (Lemon, Bengston, & Peterson, 1972). Not 
surprisingly, more positive views on aging and greater health are 
noted with those who keep active than those who isolate themselves 
and disengage from others. Community, faith-based, and volunteer 
organizations can all provide those in late adulthood with 
opportunities to remain active and maintain social networks. 
Erikson’s concept of generativity applies to many older adults, just 
as it did in midlife. 


Generativity in Late Adulthood 

Research suggests that generativity is not just a concern for midlife 
adults, but for many elders, concerns about future generations 
continue into late adulthood. As previously discussed, some older 
adults are continuing to work beyond age 65. Additionally, they are 
volunteering in their community and raising their grandchildren in 
greater numbers. 

Volunteering: Many older adults spend time volunteering. Hooyman 
and Kiyak (2011) found that religious organizations are the primary 
settings for encouraging and providing opportunities to volunteer. 
Hospitals and environmental groups also provide volunteer 
opportunities for older adults. While volunteering peaks in middle 
adulthood, it continues to remain high among adults in their 60s, 
with about 40% engaging in volunteerism (Hooyman & Kiyak, 2011). 
While the number of older adults volunteering their time does 
decline with age, the number of hours older adults volunteer does 
not show much decline until they are in their late 70s (Hendricks 
& Cutler, 2004). African-American older adults volunteer at higher 
levels than other ethnic groups (Taylor, Chatters, & Leving, 2004). 
Taylor and colleagues attribute this to the higher involvement in 


religious organizations by older African-Americans. Volunteering 
aids older adults as much as it does the community at large. Older 
adults who volunteer experience more social contact, which has 
been linked to higher rates of life satisfaction, and lower rates of 
depression and anxiety (Pilkington, Windsor, & Crisp, 2012). 

Longitudinal research also finds a strong link between health in 
later adulthood and volunteering (Kahana, Bhatta, Lovegreen, 
Kahana, & Midlarsky, 2013). Lee and colleagues found that even 
among the oldest-old, the death rate of those who volunteer is 
half that of non-volunteers (Lee, Steinman, & Tan, 2011). However, 
older adults who volunteer may already be healthier, which is why 
they can volunteer compared to their less healthy age mates. New 
opportunities exist for older adults to serve as virtual volunteers by 
dialoguing online with others from around the world and sharing 
their support, interests, and expertise. These volunteer 
opportunities range from helping teens with their writing to 
communicating with ‘neighbors’ in villages of developing countries. 
Virtual volunteering is available to those who cannot engage in face-
to-face interactions, and it opens up a new world of possibilities and 
ways to connect, maintain identity, and be productive. 


Grandparents Raising Grandchildren: According to the 2014 
American Community Survey (U.S. Census, 2014a), over 5.5 million 
children under the age of 18 were living in families headed by a 
grandparent. This was more than half a million increase from 2010. 
While most grandparents raising grandchildren are between the 
ages of 55 and 64, approximately 25% of grandparents raising their 
grandchildren are 65 and older (Office on Women’s Health, 2010a). 
For many grandparents, parenting a second time can be harder. 
Older adults have far less energy, and often the reason why they 
are now acting as parents to their grandchildren is that traumatic 
events. A survey by AARP (Goyer, 2010) found that grandparents 
were raising their grandchildren because the parents had problems 
with drugs and alcohol, had a mental illness, was incarcerated, had 
divorced, had a chronic illness, was homeless, had neglected or 
abused the child, were deployed in the military, or had died. While 
most grandparents state they gain great joy from raising their 
grandchildren, they also face greater financial, health, education, 
and housing challenges that often derail their retirement plans than 
do grandparents who do not have primary responsibility for raising 
their grandchildren. 


Social Networks in Late Adulthood 


 


A person’s social network consists of the people with whom one 
is directly involved, such as family, friends, and acquaintances 
(Fischer, 1982). As individuals age, changes occur in these social 
networks, and The Convoy Model of Social Relations and 
Socioemotional Selectivity Theory address these changes (Wrzus, 
Hanel, Wagner, & Neyer, 2013). Both theories indicate that less close 
relationships will decrease as one age, while close relationships 
will persist. However, the two theories differ in explaining why this 
occurs. 

The Convoy Model of Social Relations suggests that the social 
connections that people accumulate differ in levels of closeness and 
are held together by exchanges in social support (Antonucci, 2001; 
Kahn & Antonucci, 1980). According to the Convoy Model, 
relationships with a spouse and family members, people in the 
innermost circle of the convoy, should remain stable throughout 
the lifespan. In contrast, coworkers, neighbors, and acquaintances, 
people in the periphery of the convoy, should be less stable. These 
peripheral relationships may end due to changes in jobs, social 
roles, location, or other life events. These relationships are more 
vulnerable to changing situations than family relationships. 
Therefore, the frequency, type, and reciprocity of the social 
exchanges with peripheral relationships decrease with age. 

The Socioemotional Selectivity Theory focuses on changes in 
motivation for actively seeking social contact with others(Carstensen, 1993; Carstensen, Isaacowitz & Charles, 1999). This 
theory proposes that with increasing age, our motivational goals 
change based on how much time one has left to live. Rather than 
focusing on acquiring information from many diverse social 
relationships, as noted with adolescents and young adults, older 
adults focus on the emotional aspects of relationships. To optimize 
the experience of positive affect, older adults actively restrict their 


social life to prioritize time spent with emotionally close significant 
others. In line with this theory, older marriages are found to be 
characterized by enhanced positive and reduced negative 
interactions and older partners show more affectionate behavior 
during conflict discussions than do middle-aged partners 
(Carstensen, Gottman, & Levenson, 1995). Research showing that 
older adults have smaller networks compared to young adults, and 
tend to avoid negative interactions, also supports this theory. 

Relationship with Adult Children: Many older adults provide 
financial assistance and/or housing to adult children. There is more 
support going from the older parent to the younger adult children 
than in the other direction (Fingerman & Birditt, 2011). In addition 
to providing for their own children, many elders are raising their 
grandchildren. Consistent with socioemotional selectivity theory, 
older adults seek and are helped by, their adult children providing 
emotional support (Lang & Schütze, 2002). Lang and Schütze, as 
part of the Berlin Aging Study (BASE), surveyed adult children (mean 
age 54) and their aging parents (mean age 84). They found that the 
older parents of adult children who provided emotional support, 
such as showing tenderness toward their parent, cheering the 
parent up when he or she was sad, tended to report greater life 
satisfaction. In contrast, older adults whose children provided 
informational support, such as providing advice to the parent, 


reported less life satisfaction. Lang and Schütze found that older 
adults wanted their relationship with their children to be more 
emotionally meaningful. Daughters and adult children who were 
younger tended to provide such support more than sons and adult 
children who were older. Lang and Schütze also found that adult 
children who were more autonomous rather than emotionally 
dependent on their parents, had more emotionally meaningful 
relationships with their parents, from both the parents’ and adult 
children’s point of view. 

Friendships: Friendships are not formed in order to enhance 
status or careers, and may be based purely on a sense of connection 
or the enjoyment of being together. Most elderly people have at 
least one close friend. These friends may provide emotional as well 
as physical support. Being able to talk with friends and rely on 
others is very important during this stage of life. Bookwala, 
Marshall, and Manning (2014) found that the availability of a friend 
played a significant role in protecting health from the impact of 
widowhood. Specifically, those who became widowed and had a 
friend as a confidante reported significantly lower somatic 
depressive symptoms, better self-rated health, and fewer sick days 
in bed than those who reported not having a friend as a confidante. 
In contrast, having a family member as a confidante did not provide 
health protection for those recently widowed. 

Loneliness or Solitude: Loneliness is the discrepancy between 
the social contact a person has and the contacts a person wants 
(Brehm, Miller, Perlman, & Campbell, 2002). It can result from social 
or emotional isolation. Women tend to experience loneliness due 
to social isolation; men from emotional isolation. Loneliness can be 
accompanied by a lack of self-worth, impatience, desperation, and 
depression. Being alone does not always result in loneliness. For 
some, it means solitude. Solitude involves gaining self-awareness, 
taking care of the self, being comfortable alone, and pursuing one’s 
interests (Brehm et al., 2002). In contrast, loneliness is perceived as 
social isolation. 

For those in late adulthood, loneliness can be especially 


detrimental. Novotney (2019) reviewed the research on loneliness 
and social isolation and found that loneliness was linked to a 40% 
increase in risk for dementia and a 30% increase in the risk of stroke 
or coronary heart disease. This was hypothesized to be due to a rise 
in stress hormones, depression, and anxiety, as well as the individual 
lacking encouragement from others to engage in healthy behaviors. 
In contrast, older adults who take part in social clubs and church 
groups have a lower risk of death. Opportunities to reside in mixed-
age housing and continuing to feel like a productive member of 
society have also been found to decrease feelings of social isolation, 
and thus loneliness. 

Late Adult Lifestyles 

Marriage: As can be seen in Figure 9.45, the most common living 
arrangement for older adults in 2015 was marriage (AOA, 2017). 
Although this was more common for older men. 

Widowhood: Losing one’s spouse is one of the most difficult 
transitions in life. The Social Readjustment Rating Scale, commonlyknown as the Holmes-Rahe Stress Inventory, rates the death of a 
spouse as the most significant stressor (Holmes & Rahe, 1967). The 
loss of a spouse after many years of marriage may make an older 
adult feel adrift in life. They must remake their identity after years 
of seeing themselves as a husband or wife. 
Approximately, 1 in 3 
women aged 65 and older are widowed, compared with about 1 in 10 
men. 


Loneliness is the biggest challenge for those who have lost their 
spouse (Kowalski & Bondmass, 2008). However, several factors can 
influence how well someone adjusts to this event. Older adults who 
are more extroverted (McCrae & Costa, 1988) and have higher self-
efficacy, (Carr, 2004b) often fare better. Positive support from adult 
children is also associated with fewer symptoms of depression and 
better adjustment in the months following widowhood (Ha, 2010). 

The context of death is also an important factor in how people 
may react to the death of a spouse. The stress of caring for an 
ill spouse can result in a mixed blessing when the ill partner dies 
(Erber & Szchman, 2015). The death of a spouse who died after a 
lengthy illness may come as a relief for the surviving spouse, who 
may have had the pressure of providing care for someone who was 
increasingly less able to care for themselves. At the same time, this 
sense of relief may be intermingled with guilt for feeling relief at the 
passing of their spouse. The emotional issues of grief are complex 
and will be discussed in more detail in chapter 10. 

Widowhood also poses health risks. The widowhood mortality 


effect refers to the higher risk of death after the death of a spouse(Sullivan & Fenelon, 2014). Subramanian, Elwert, and Christakis 
(2008) found that widowhood increases the risk of dying from 
almost all causes. 

However, research suggests that the predictability of the spouse’s 
death plays an important role in the relationship between 
widowhood and mortality. Elwert and Christakis (2008) found that 
the rate of mortality for widows and widowers was lower if they 
had time to prepare for the death of their spouses, such as in the 
case of a terminal illness like Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s. Another 
factor that influences the risk of mortality is gender. Men show a 
higher risk of mortality following the death of their spouse if they 
have higher health problems (Bennett, Hughes, & Smith, 2005). In 
addition, widowers have a higher risk of suicide than do widows 
(Ruckenhauser, Yazdani, & Ravaglia, 2007). 

Divorce: As noted in Chapter 8, older adults are divorcing at 
higher rates than in prior generations. However, adults age 65 and 
over are still less likely to divorce than middle-aged and young 
adults (Wu & Schimmele, 2007). 
Divorce poses a number of 
challenges for older adults, especially women, who are more likely 
to experience financial difficulties and are more likely to remain 
single than are older men (McDonald & Robb, 2004). However, in 
both America (Lin, 2008) and England (Glaser, Stuchbury, Tomassini, 
& Askham, 2008) studies have found that the adult children of 
divorced parents offer more support and care to their mothers 
than their fathers. While divorced, older men may be better off 
financially and are more likely to find another partner, they may 
receive less support from their adult children. 


Dating: Due to changing social norms and shifting cohort 
demographics, it has become more common for single older adults 
to be involved in dating and romantic relationships (Alterovitz & 
Mendelsohn, 2011). An analysis of widows and widowers ages 65 
and older found that 18 months after the death of a spouse, 37% 
of men and 15% of women were interested in dating (Carr, 2004a). 
Unfortunately, opportunities to develop close relationships often 
diminish in later life as social networks decrease because of 
retirement, relocation, and the death of friends and loved ones (de 
Vries, 1996). Consequently, older adults, much like those younger, 
are increasing their social networks using technologies, including e-
mail, chat rooms, and online dating sites (Fox, 2004; Wright & Query, 
2004; Papernow, 2018). 

Interestingly, older men and women parallel online dating 
information as those younger. Alterovitz and Mendelsohn (2011) 
analyzed 600 internet personal ads from different age groups, and 
across the life span, men sought physical attractiveness and offered 
status-related information more than women. With advanced age, 
men desired women increasingly younger than themselves, whereas 
women desired older men until ages 75 and over when they sought 
men younger than themselves. Research has previously shown that 
older women in romantic relationships are not interested in 
becoming a caregiver or becoming widowed for a second time (Carr, 


2004a). Additionally, older men are more eager to partner than are 
older women (Davidson, 2001; Erber & Szuchman, 2015). Concerns 
expressed by older women included not wanting to lose their 
autonomy, care for a potentially ill partner, or merge their finances 
with someone (Watson & Stelle, 2011). 

Older dating adults also need to know about threats to sexual 
health, including being at risk for sexually transmitted diseases, 
including chlamydia, genital herpes, and HIV. Nearly 25% of people 
living with HIV/AIDS in the United States are 50 or older (Office 
on Women’s Health, 2010b). Githens and Abramsohn (2010) found 
that only 25% of adults 50 and over who were single or had a new 
sexual partner used a condom the last time they had sex. Robin 
(2010) stated that 40% of those 50 and over have never been tested 
for HIV. These results indicated that educating all individuals, not 
just adolescents, on healthy sexual behavior is important. 

Remarriage and Cohabitation: Older adults who remarry often 
find that their remarriages are more stable than those of younger 
adults. Kemp and Kemp (2002) suggest that greater emotional 
maturity may lead to more realistic expectations regarding marital 
relationships, leading to greater stability in remarriages in later life. 
Older adults are also more likely to be seeking companionship in 
their romantic relationships. Carr (2004a) found that older adults 
who have considerable emotional support from their friends were 
less likely to seek romantic relationships. In addition, older adults 
who have divorced often desire the companionship of intimate 
relationships without marriage. As a result, cohabitation is 
increasing among older adults, and like remarriage, cohabitation 
in later adulthood is often associated with more positive 
consequences than it is in younger age groups (King & Scott, 2005). 
No longer being interested in raising children, and perhaps wishing 
to protect family wealth, older adults may see cohabitation as a 
good alternative to marriage. In 2014, 2% of adults age 65 and up 
were cohabitating (Stepler, 2016b). 

Living Apart Together: In addition to cohabiting there has been 


an increase in living apart together (LAT), which is “a monogamous 
intimate partnership between unmarried individuals who live in 
separate homes but identify themselves as a committed couple” 
(Benson & Coleman, 2016, p. 797). This trend has been found in 
several nations and is motivated by: 

A strong desire to be independent in day-to-day decisions 
Maintaining their own home 
Keeping boundaries around established relationships 
Maintaining financial stability 


Besides the desire to be autonomous, there is also a need for 
companionship, sexual intimacy, and emotional support. According 
to Bensen and Coleman, there are differences in LAT among older 
and younger adults. Those who are younger often enter into LAT 
out of circumstances, such as the job market, and they frequently 
view this arrangement as a transitional stage. In contrast, 80% of 
older adults reported that they did not wish to cohabitate or marry. 
For some, it was a conscious choice to live more independently. For 
instance, older women desired the LAT lifestyle as a way of avoiding 
the traditional gender roles that are often inherent in relationships 
where the couple lives together. However, some older adults 
become LATs because they fear social disapproval from others if 
they were to live together. 

Gay and Lesbian Elders 

Approximately 3 million older adults in the United States identify as 
lesbian or gay (Hillman & Hinrichsen, 2014). By 2025 that number is 
expected to rise to more than 7 million (National Gay and Lesbian 
Task Force, 2006). Despite the increase in numbers, older lesbian 
and gay adults are one of the least researched demographic groups, 
and the research there is portrayed a population faced with 


discrimination. According to the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (2011), compared to heterosexuals, lesbian and gay adults 
experience both physical and mental health differences. More than 
40% of lesbian and gay adults ages 50 and over suffer from at least 
one chronic illness or disability and compared to heterosexuals they 
are more likely to smoke and binge drink (Hillman & Hinrichsen, 
2014). Additionally, gay older adults have an increased risk of 
prostate cancer (Blank, 2005) and infection from HIV and other 
sexually transmitted illnesses (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 2008). When compared to heterosexuals, lesbian and 
gay elders have less support from others as they are twice as likely 
to live alone and four times less likely to have adult children (Hillman 
& Hinrichsen, 2014). 

Lesbian and gay older adults who belong to ethnic and cultural 
minorities, conservative religions, and rural communities may face 
additional stressors. Ageism, heterocentrism, sexism, and racism 
can combine cumulatively and impact the older adult beyond the 
negative impact of each individual form of discrimination (Hillman 
& Hinrichsen, 2014). David and Knight (2008) found that older gay 
black men reported higher rates of racism than younger gay black 
men and higher levels of perceived ageism than older gay white 
men. 

LGBT Elder Care: Approximately 7 million LGBT people over age 
50 will reside in the United States by 2030, and 4.7 million of them 
will need elder care. Decisions regarding elder care are often left for 
families, and because many LGBT people are estranged from their 
families, they are left in a vulnerable position when seeking living 
arrangements (Alleccia & Bailey, 2019). A history of discriminatory 
policies, such as housing restricted to married individuals involving 
one man and one woman, and stigma associated with LGBT people 
make them especially vulnerable to negative housing experiences 
when looking for eldercare. 


Although lesbian and gay older adults face many challenges, more 
than 80% indicate that they engage in some form of wellness or 
spiritual activity (Fredrickson-Goldsen et al., 2011). They also gather 
social support from friends and “family members by choice” rather 
than legal or biological relatives (Hillman & Hinrichsen, 2014). This 
broader social network provides extra support to gay and lesbian 
elders. 

An important consideration when reviewing the development of 
gay and lesbian older adults is the cohort in which they grew up 
(Hillman & Hinrichsen, 2014). The oldest lesbian and gay adults came 
of age in the 1950s when there were no laws to protect them from 
victimization. The baby boomers, who grew up in the 1960s and 
1970s, began to see states repeal laws that criminalized homosexual 
behavior. 
Future lesbian and gay elders will have different 
experiences due to the legal right for same-sex marriage and 
greater societal acceptance. Consequently, just like all those in late 
adulthood, understanding that gay and lesbian elders are a 
heterogeneous population is important when understanding their 
overall development. 


Current research indicates that at least 1 in 10, or approximately 
4.3 million, older Americans are affected by at least one form of 


elder abuse per year (Roberto, 2016). Those between 60 and 69 years 
of age are more susceptible than those older. This may be because 
younger older adults more often live with adult children or a spouse, 
two groups with the most likely abusers. 

Cognitive impairment, including confusion and communication 
deficits, is the greatest risk factor for elder abuse, while a decline 
in overall health resulting in a greater dependency on others is 
another. Having a disability also places an elder at a higher risk for 
abuse (Youdin, 2016). Definitions of elder abuse typically recognize 
five types of abuse as shown in Table 9.8 

The consequences of elder abuse are significant and include 
injuries, new or exacerbated health conditions, hospitalizations, 
premature institutionalization, and early death (Roberto, 2016). 
Psychological and emotional abuse is considered the most common 
form, even though it is underreported and may go unrecognized by 
the elder. Continual emotional mistreatment is very damaging as 
it becomes internalized and results in late-life emotional problems 
and impairment. Financial abuse and exploitation is increasing and 
costs seniors nearly 3 billion dollars per year (Lichtenberg, 2016). 
Financial abuse is the second most common form after emotional 
abuse and affects approximately 5% of elders. Abuse and neglect 
occurring in a nursing home is estimated to be 25%-30% (Youdin, 
2016). Abuse of nursing home residents is more often found in 
facilities that are run down and understaffed 

Type Description 
Physical Abuse Physical force resulting in injury, pain, or 
impairment 
Sexual Abuse Nonconsensual sexual contact 
Psychological and 
Emotional Abuse 
Infliction of distress through verbal or nonverbal 
acts such as yelling, threatening, or isolating 
Financial Abuse 
and Exploitation 
Improper use of an elder’s finances, property, or 
assets 
Neglect and 
Abandonment 
Intentional or unintentional refusal or failure to 
fulfill caregiving duties to an elder 




Older women are more likely to be victims than men, and one 
reason is due to women living longer. Additionally, a family history 
of violence makes older women more vulnerable, especially for 
physical and sexual abuse (Acierno et al., 2010). However, Kosberg 
(2014) found that men were less likely to report abuse. Recent 
research indicated no differences among ethnic groups in abuse 
prevalence, however, cultural norms regarding what constitutes 
abuse differ based on ethnicity. For example, Dakin and Pearlmutter 
found that working-class White women did not consider verbal 
abuse as elder abuse, and higher socioeconomic status African 
American and White women did not consider financial abuse as a 
form of elder abuse (as cited in Roberto, 2016, p. 304). 

Perpetrators of elder abuse are typically family members and 
include spouses/partners and older children (Roberto, 2016). 
Children who are abusive tend to be dependent on their parents for 
financial, housing, and emotional support. Substance use, mental 
illness, and chronic unemployment increase dependency on 
parents, which can then increase the possibility of elder abuse. 
Prosecuting a family member who has financially abused a parent 
is very difficult. The victim may be reluctant to press charges and 
the court dockets are often very full resulting in long waits before 
a case is heard. According to Tanne, family members abandoning 
older family members with severe disabilities in emergency rooms 
is a growing problem as an estimated 100,000 are dumped each year 
(as cited in Berk, 2007). Paid caregivers and professionals trusted to 
make decisions on behalf of an elder, such as guardians and lawyers, 
also perpetuate abuse. When elders feel they have social support 
and are engaged with others, they are less likely to suffer abuse. 

Substance Abuse and the Elderly 

Alcohol and drug problems, particularly prescription drug abuse, 


have become a serious health concern among older adults. Although 
people 65 years of age and older make up only 13% of the 
population, they account for almost 30% of all medications 
prescribed in the United States. According to the National Council 
on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence (NCADD) (2015), the following 
statistics illustrate the significance of substance abuse for those in 
late adulthood: 

There are 2.5 million older adults with an alcohol or drug 
problem. 
Six to eleven percent of elderly hospital admissions, 14 percent 
of elderly emergency room admissions, and 20 percent of 
elderly psychiatric hospital admissions are a result of alcohol 
or drug problems. 
Widowers over the age of 75 have the highest rate of 
alcoholism in the U.S. 
Nearly 50 percent of nursing home residents have alcohol-
related problems. 
Older adults are hospitalized as often for alcoholic related 
problems as for heart attacks. 
Nearly 17 million prescriptions for tranquilizers are prescribed 
for older adults each year. Benzodiazepines, a type of 
tranquilizing drug, are the most commonly misused and 
abused prescription medications. 


Risk factors for psychoactive substance abuse in older adults 
include social isolation, which can lead to depression (Youdin, 2016). 
This can be caused by the death of a spouse/partner, family 
members and/or friends, retirement, moving, and reduced activity 
levels. Additionally, medical conditions, chronic pain, anxiety, and 
stress can all lead to the abuse of substances. 

Diagnosis Difficulties: Using criteria from the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Disorder-5th Edition (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013), diagnosing older adults with a substance use 
disorder can be difficult (Youdin, 2016). For example, compared to 


adolescents and younger adults, older adults are not looking to get 
high, but rather become dependent by accident. 

Additionally, stereotypes of older adults, which include memory 
deficits, confusion, depression, agitation, motor problems, and 
hostility, can result in a diagnosis of cognitive impairment instead 
of a substance use disorder. Further, a diagnosis of a substance use 
disorder involves impairment in work, school, or home obligations, 
and because older adults are not typically working, in school or 
caring for children, these impairments would not be exhibited. 
Stigma and shame about use, as well as the belief that one’s use 
is a private matter, may keep older adults from seeking assistance. 
Lastly, physicians may be biased against asking those in late 
adulthood if they have a problem with drugs or alcohol (NCADD, 
2015). 

Abused Substances: Drugs of choice for older adults include 
alcohol, benzodiazepines, opioid prescription medications, and 
marijuana. The abuse of prescription medications is expected to 
increase significantly. Siriwardena, Qureshi, Gibson, Collier, and 
Lathamn (2006) found that family physicians prescribe 
benzodiazepines and opioids to older adults to deal with 
psychosocial and pain problems rather than prescribe alternatives 
to medication such as therapy. Those in late adulthood are also 
more sensitive to the effects of alcohol than those younger because 
of an age-related decrease in the ratio between lean body mass and 
fat (Erber & Szuchman, 2015). 


Additionally, “liver enzymes that metabolize alcohol become less 
efficient with age and central nervous system sensitivity to drugs 
increase with age” (p.134). Those in late adulthood are also more 
likely to be taking other medications, and this can result in 
unpredictable interactions with psychoactive substances (Youdin, 
2016). 

Cannabis Use: Blazer and Wu (2009) found that adults aged 50-64 
were more likely to use cannabis than older adults. These “baby 
boomers” with the highest cannabis use included men, those 
unmarried/unpartnered, and those with depression. In contrast to 
the negative effects of cannabis, which include panic reactions, 
anxiety, perceptual distortions and exacerbation of mood and 
psychotic disorders, cannabis can provide benefits to an older 
adults with medical conditions (Youdin, 2016). For example, 
cannabis can be used in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, 
Parkinson’s disease, chronic pain, and fatigue and nausea from the 
effects of chemotherapy (Williamson & Evans, 2000). 

Future Substance Abuse Concerns: There will be an increase in 
the number of seniors abusing substances in the future because 
the baby boomer generation has a history of having been exposed 
to, and having experienced, psychoactive substance use over their 
adult life. This is a significant difference between the current and 


previous generations of older adults (National Institutes of Health, 
2014c). Efforts will be needed to adequately address these future 
substance abuse issues for the elderly due to both the health risks 
for them and the expected burden on the health care system. 

Successful Aging 


Although definitions of successful aging are value-laden, Rowe and 
Kahn (1997) defined three criteria of successful aging that are useful 
for research and behavioral interventions. 

They include: 

Relative avoidance of disease, disability, and risk factors, like 
high blood pressure, smoking, or obesity 
Maintenance of high physical and cognitive functioning 
Active engagement in social and productive activities 


For example, research has demonstrated that age-related declines 
in cognitive functioning across the adult life span may be slowed 
through physical exercise and lifestyle interventions (Kramer & 
Erickson, 2007). 

Another way that older adults can respond to the challenges of 
aging is through compensation. Specifically, selective optimization 
with compensation is used when the elder makes adjustments, as 
needed, in order to continue living as independently and actively 
as possible (Baltes & Dickson, 2001). When older adults lose 
functioning, referred to as loss-based selection, they may first use 
new resources/technologies or continually practice tasks to 
maintain their skills. However, when tasks become too difficult, they 
may compensate by choosing other ways to achieve their goals. For 
example, a person who can no longer drive needs to find alternative 
transportation, or a person who is compensating for having less 


energy learns how to reorganize the daily routine to avoid over-
exertion. 